



kingdom of italy (holy roman empire) - wikipedia
document.documentelement.classname = document.documentelement.classname.replace( /(^|\s)client-nojs(\s|$)/, "$1client-js$2" );
(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgcanonicalnamespace":"","wgcanonicalspecialpagename":false,"wgnamespacenumber":0,"wgpagename":"kingdom_of_italy_(holy_roman_empire)","wgtitle":"kingdom of italy (holy roman empire)","wgcurrevisionid":883687879,"wgrevisionid":883687879,"wgarticleid":6006557,"wgisarticle":true,"wgisredirect":false,"wgaction":"view","wgusername":null,"wgusergroups":["*"],"wgcategories":["articles lacking in-text citations from january 2017","all articles lacking in-text citations","articles containing latin-language text","states and territories established in the 850s","former kingdoms","monarchy of the holy roman empire","kingdom of italy (holy roman empire)","establishments in the carolingian empire"],"wgbreakframes":false,"wgpagecontentlanguage":"en","wgpagecontentmodel":"wikitext","wgseparatortransformtable":["",""],"wgdigittransformtable":["",""],"wgdefaultdateformat":"dmy","wgmonthnames":["","january","february","march","april","may","june","july","august","september","october","november","december"],"wgmonthnamesshort":["","jan","feb","mar","apr","may","jun","jul","aug","sep","oct","nov","dec"],"wgrelevantpagename":"kingdom_of_italy_(holy_roman_empire)","wgrelevantarticleid":6006557,"wgrequestid":"xgmimwpaic8aajelnzeaaabe","wgcspnonce":false,"wgisprobablyeditable":true,"wgrelevantpageisprobablyeditable":true,"wgrestrictionedit":[],"wgrestrictionmove":[],"wgflaggedrevsparams":{"tags":{}},"wgstablerevisionid":null,"wgcategorytreepagecategoryoptions":"{\"mode\":0,\"hideprefix\":20,\"showcount\":true,\"namespaces\":false}","wgwikieditorenabledmodules":[],"wgbetafeaturesfeatures":[],"wgmediavieweronclick":true,"wgmediaviewerenabledbydefault":true,"wgpopupsshouldsendmoduletouser":true,"wgpopupsconflictswithnavpopupgadget":false,"wgvisualeditor":{"pagelanguagecode":"en","pagelanguagedir":"ltr","pagevariantfallbacks":"en","usepageimages":true,"usepagedescriptions":true},"wgmfispagecontentmodeleditable":true,"wgmfenablefontchanger":true,"wgmfdisplaywikibasedescriptions":{"search":true,"nearby":true,"watchlist":true,"tagline":false},"wgrelatedarticles":null,"wgrelatedarticlesusecirrussearch":true,"wgrelatedarticlesonlyusecirrussearch":false,"wgwmeschemaeditattemptstepoversample":false,"wgpoweredbyhhvm":true,"wgulscurrentautonym":"english","wgnoticeproject":"wikipedia","wgcentralnoticecookiestodelete":[],"wgcentralnoticecategoriesusinglegacy":["fundraising","fundraising"],"wgwikibaseitemid":"q838931","wgscorenotelanguages":{"arabic":"العربية","catalan":"català","deutsch":"deutsch","english":"english","espanol":"español","italiano":"italiano","nederlands":"nederlands","norsk":"norsk","portugues":"português","suomi":"suomi","svenska":"svenska","vlaams":"west-vlams"},"wgscoredefaultnotelanguage":"nederlands","wgcentralauthmobiledomain":false,"wgcodemirrorenabled":true,"wgvisualeditortoolbarscrolloffset":0,"wgvisualeditorunsupportededitparams":["undo","undoafter","veswitched"],"wgeditsubmitbuttonlabelpublish":true,"oreswikiid":"enwiki","oresbaseurl":"http://ores.discovery.wmnet:8081/","oresapiversion":3});mw.loader.state({"ext.gadget.charinsert-styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site.styles":"ready","site.styles":"ready","noscript":"ready","user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site":"ready","user":"ready","user.options":"ready","user.tokens":"loading","ext.cite.styles":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.shared":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.commonprint":"ready","mediawiki.toc.styles":"ready","wikibase.client.init":"ready","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.noscript":"ready","ext.uls.interlanguage":"ready","ext.wikimediabadges":"ready","ext.3d.styles":"ready","mediawiki.skinning.interface":"ready","skins.vector.styles":"ready"});mw.loader.implement("user.tokens@0tffind",function($,jquery,require,module){/*@nomin*/mw.user.tokens.set({"edittoken":"+\\","patroltoken":"+\\","watchtoken":"+\\","csrftoken":"+\\"});
});rlpagemodules=["ext.cite.ux-enhancements","ext.scribunto.logs","site","mediawiki.page.startup","mediawiki.page.ready","mediawiki.toc","mediawiki.searchsuggest","ext.gadget.teahouse","ext.gadget.referencetooltips","ext.gadget.watchlist-notice","ext.gadget.drn-wizard","ext.gadget.charinsert","ext.gadget.reftoolbar","ext.gadget.extra-toolbar-buttons","ext.gadget.switcher","ext.centralauth.centralautologin","mmv.head","mmv.bootstrap.autostart","ext.popups","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.init","ext.visualeditor.targetloader","ext.eventlogging","ext.wikimediaevents","ext.navigationtiming","ext.uls.eventlogger","ext.uls.init","ext.uls.compactlinks","ext.uls.interface","ext.quicksurveys.init","ext.centralnotice.geoip","ext.centralnotice.startup","skins.vector.js"];mw.loader.load(rlpagemodules);});























 





kingdom of italy (holy roman empire) 
from wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 jump to navigation
jump to search
for other kingdoms of italy, see kingdom of italy (disambiguation).
this article includes a list of references, but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (january 2017) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
 the kingdom of italy within the holy roman empire and within europe in the early 11th century.
part of a series on the

history of italy

early
prehistoric italy
etruscan civilization (12th–6th c. bc)
magna graecia (8th–3rd c. bc)

ancient rome
kingdom (753 bc–509 bc)
republic (509 bc–27 ad)
empire (27 ad–286 ad)
roman italy
western empire (286 ad–476 ad)
praetorian prefecture of italy

early kingdom odoacer's 476-493 ostrogothic 493-553 vandal 435-534 lombard (independent) 565-774 lombard (de facto frankish rule) 774-885 frankish (carolingian) 885-962 germanic (holy roman) 962-1801

medieval
italy in the middle ages
byzantine reconquest of italy (6th–8th c.)
islam and normans in southern italy
maritime republics and italian city-states
guelphs and ghibellines

early modern
italian renaissance (14th–16th c.)
italian wars (1494–1559)
catholic revival (1545-1648)
foreign dominations
napoleonic italy (1801–1814)

republic
kingdom

risorgimento (1815–1871)

young italy
thousand


modern
monarchy (1861–1945)
colonial empire (1882–1960)
italy in world war i (1914–1918)
fascism (1922–1943)
italy in world war ii (1940–1945)
fascist italian social republic, partisans and civil war (1943–1945)
republic (1945–present)
years of lead (1970s–1980s)

by topic
list of historic states

citizenship
currency
economy
fashion
genetic
military
music
postage
railway


timeline

 italy portalvte
the kingdom of italy (latin: regnum italiae or regnum italicum, italian: regno d'italia) was one of the constituent kingdoms of the holy roman empire, along with the kingdoms of germany, bohemia, and burgundy. it comprised northern and central italy, but excluded the republic of venice and the papal states. its original capital was pavia until the 11th century.
in 773, charlemagne, the king of the franks, crossed the alps to invade the kingdom of the lombards, which encompassed all of italy except the duchy of rome and some byzantine possessions in the south. in june 774, the kingdom collapsed and the franks became masters of northern italy. the southern areas remained under lombard control as the duchy of benevento is changed into the rather independent principality of benevento. charlemagne adopted the title "king of the lombards" and in 800 was crowned "emperor of the romans" in rome. members of the carolingian dynasty continued to rule italy until the deposition of charles the fat in 887, after which they once briefly regained the throne in 894–896. until 961, the rule of italy was continually contested by several aristocratic families from both within and outside the kingdom.
in 961, king otto i of germany, already married to adelaide, widow of a previous king of italy, invaded the kingdom and had himself crowned in pavia on 25 december. he continued on to rome, where he had himself crowned emperor on 7 february 962. the union of the crowns of italy and germany with that of the so-called "empire of the romans" proved stable. burgundy was added to this union in 1032, and by the twelfth century the term "holy roman empire" had come into use to describe it. from 961 on, the emperor of the romans was usually also king of italy and germany, although emperors sometimes appointed their heirs to rule in italy and occasionally the italian bishops and noblemen elected a king of their own in opposition to that of germany. the absenteeism of the italian monarch led to the rapid disappearance of a central government in the high middle ages, but the idea that italy was a kingdom within the empire remained and emperors frequently sought to impose their will on the evolving italian city-states. the resulting wars between guelphs and ghibellines, the anti-imperialist and imperialist factions, respectively, were characteristic of italian politics in the 12th–14th centuries. the lombard league was the most famous example of this situation; though not a declared separatist movement, it openly challenged the emperor's claim to power.
the century between the humiliation of canossa (1077) and the treaty of venice of 1177 resulted in the formation of  city states independent of the germanic emperor. a series of wars in lombardy from 1423 to 1454 reduced the number of competing states in italy. the next forty years were relatively peaceful in italy, but in 1494 the peninsula was invaded by france. after the imperial reform of 1495–1512, the italian kingdom corresponded to the unencircled territories south of the alps. juridically the emperor maintained an interest in them as nominal king and overlord, but the "government" of the kingdom consisted of little more than the plenipotentiaries the emperor appointed to represent him and those governors he appointed to rule his own italian states. 
the habsburg rule in several parts of italy continued in various forms but came to an end with the campaigns of the french revolutionaries in 1792–1797, when a series of sister republics were set up with local support by napoleon and then united into the italian republic (napoleonic) under his presidency. in 1805 the republic became a new kingdom of italy (napoleonic), in personal union with france.

contents

1 lombard kingdom
2 constituent of the carolingian empire
3 imperial italy

3.1 staufer
3.2 decline


4 aftermath
5 notes
6 references
7 see also


lombard kingdom[edit]
main article: kingdom of the lombards
after the battle of taginae, in which the ostrogoth king totila was killed, the byzantine general narses captured rome and besieged cumae. teia, the new ostrogothic king, gathered the remnants of the ostrogothic army and marched to relieve the siege, but in october 552 narses ambushed him at mons lactarius (modern monti lattari) in campania, near mount vesuvius and nuceria alfaterna. the battle lasted two days and teia was killed in the fighting. ostrogothic power in italy was eliminated, but according to roman historian procopius of caesarea, narses allowed the ostrogothic population and their rugian allies to live peacefully in italy under roman sovereignty.[1] the absence of any real authority in italy immediately after the battle led to an invasion by the franks and alemanni, but they too were defeated in the battle of the volturnus and the peninsula was, for a short time, reintegrated into the empire.

 the iron crown of lombardy, now at monza cathedral
the kings of the lombards (latin: reges langobardorum, singular rex langobardorum) ruled that germanic people from their invasion of italy in 567–68 until the lombardic identity became lost in the ninth and tenth centuries. after 568, the lombard kings sometimes styled themselves kings of italy (latin: rex totius italiæ). upon the lombard defeat at the 774 siege of pavia, the kingdom came under the frankish domination of charlemagne. the iron crown of lombardy (corona ferrea) was used for the coronation of the lombard kings, and the kings of italy thereafter, for centuries.
the primary sources for the lombard kings before the frankish conquest are the anonymous 7th-century origo gentis langobardorum and the 8th-century historia langobardorum of paul the deacon. the earliest kings (the pre-lethings) listed in the origo are almost certainly legendary. they purportedly reigned during the migration period; the first ruler attested independently of lombard tradition is tato.
the actual control of the sovereigns of both the major areas that constitute the kingdom – langobardia major in the centre-north (in turn divided into a western, or neustria, and one eastern, or austria and tuskia) and langobardia minor in the centre-south, was not constant during the two centuries of life of the kingdom. an initial phase of strong autonomy of the many constituent duchies developed over time with growing regal authority, even if the dukes' desires for autonomy were never fully achieved.
the lombard kingdom proved to be more stable than its ostrogothic predecessor, but in 774, on the pretext of defending the papacy, it was conquered by the franks under charlemagne. they kept the italo-lombard realm separate from their own, but the kingdom shared in all the partitions, divisions, civil wars, and succession crises of the carolingian empire of which it became a part until, by the end of the ninth century, the italian kingdom was an independent, but highly decentralised, state.

constituent of the carolingian empire[edit]
the death of the emperor lothair i in 855 led to his realm of middle francia being split among his three sons.  the eldest, louis ii, inherited the carolingian lands in italy, which were now for the first time (save the brief rule of charlemagne's son pepin in the first decade of the century), ruled as a distinct unit. the kingdom included all of italy as far south as rome and spoleto, but the rest of italy to the south was under the rule of the lombard principality of benevento or of the byzantine empire.
following louis ii's death without heirs, there were several decades of confusion. the imperial crown was initially disputed among the carolingian rulers of west francia (france) and east francia (germany), with first the western king (charles the bald) and then the eastern (charles the fat) attaining the prize. following the deposition of the latter, local nobles – guy iii of spoleto and berengar of friuli – disputed over the crown, and outside intervention did not cease, with arnulf of eastern francia and louis the blind of provence both claiming the imperial throne for a time. the kingdom was also beset by arab raiding parties from sicily and north africa, and central authority was minimal at best.
in the 10th century, the situation hardly improved, as various burgundian and local noblemen continued to dispute over the crown. order was only imposed from outside, when the german king otto i invaded italy and seized both the imperial and italian thrones for himself in 962.

imperial italy[edit]
in 951 king otto i of germany had married adelaide of burgundy, the widow of late king lothair ii of italy. otto assumed the iron crown of lombardy at pavia despite his rival margrave berengar of ivrea. when in 960 berengar attacked the papal states, king otto, summoned by pope john xii, conquered the italian kingdom and on 2 february 962 had himself crowned holy roman emperor at rome. from that time on, the kings of italy were always also kings of germany, and italy thus became a constituent kingdom of the holy roman empire, along with the kingdom of germany (regnum teutonicorum) and – from 1032 – burgundy. the german king (rex romanorum) would be crowned by the archbishop of milan with the iron crown in pavia as a prelude to the visit to rome to be crowned emperor by the pope.
in general, the monarch was an absentee, spending most of his time in germany and leaving the kingdom of italy with little central authority. there was also a lack of powerful landed magnates – the only notable one being the margraviate of tuscany, which had wide lands in tuscany, lombardy, and the emilia, but which failed due to lack of heirs after the death of matilda of canossa in 1115. this left a power vacuum – increasingly filled by the papacy and by the bishops, as well as by the increasingly wealthy italian cities, which gradually came to dominate the surrounding countryside. upon the death of emperor otto iii in 1002, one of late berengar's successors, margrave arduin of ivrea, even succeeded in assuming the italian crown and in defeating the imperial forces under duke otto i of carinthia. not until 1004 could the new german king henry ii of germany, by the aid of bishop leo of vercelli, move into italy to have himself crowned rex italiae. arduin ranks as the last domestic "king of italy" before the accession of victor emmanuel ii in 1861.
henry's salian successor conrad ii tried to confirm his dominion against archbishop aribert of milan and other italian aristocrats (seniores). while besieging milan in 1037, he issued the constitutio de feudis in order to secure the support of the vasvassores petty gentry, whose fiefs he declared hereditary. indeed, conrad could stable his rule, however, the imperial supremacy in italy remained contested.

staufer[edit]
 imperial italy (outlined in red) in the 12th and 13th centuries
the cities first demonstrated their increasing power during the reign of the hohenstaufen emperor frederick barbarossa (1152–1190), whose attempts to restore imperial authority in the peninsula led to a series of wars with the lombard league, a league of northern italian cities, and ultimately to a decisive victory for the league at the battle of legnano in 1176, which forced frederick to recognize the autonomy of the italian cities.
frederick's son henry vi actually managed to extend hohenstaufen authority in italy by his conquest of the norman kingdom of sicily, which comprised sicily and all of southern italy. henry's son, frederick ii, holy roman emperor – the first emperor since the 10th century to actually base himself in italy – attempted to return to his father's task of restoring imperial authority in the northern italian kingdom, which led to fierce opposition not only from a reformed lombard league, but also from the popes, who had become increasingly jealous of their temporal realm in central italy (theoretically a part of the empire), and concerned about the hegemonic ambitions of the hohenstaufen emperors.
frederick ii's efforts to bring all of italy under his control failed as signally as those of his grandfather, and his death in 1250 marked the effective end of the kingdom of italy as a genuine political unit. conflict continued between ghibellines (imperial supporters) and guelfs (papal supporters) in the italian cities, but these conflicts bore less and less relation to the origins of the parties in question.

decline[edit]
the italian campaigns of the holy roman emperors decreased, but the kingdom did not become wholly meaningless. in 1310 the luxembourg king henry vii of germany with 5,000 men again crossed the alps, moved into milan and had himself crowned with the iron crown of lombardy, sparking a guelph rebellion under lord guido della torre. henry restored the rule of matteo i visconti and proceeded to rome, where he was crowned holy roman emperor by three cardinals in place of pope clement v in 1312. his further plans to restore the imperial rule and to invade the kingdom of naples were aborted by his sudden death the next year.
successive emperors in the 14th and 15th centuries were bound in the struggle between the rivaling luxembourg, habsburg and wittelsbach dynasties. in the conflict with frederick the fair, king louis iv (reigned until 1347) had himself crowned emperor in rome by antipope nicholas v in 1328. his successor charles iv also returned to rome to be crowned in 1355. none of the emperors forgot their theoretical claims to dominion as kings of italy. nor did the italians themselves forget the claims of the emperors to universal dominion: writers like dante alighieri (died 1321) and marsilius of padua (c. 1275 – c. 1342) expressed their commitment both to the principle of universal monarchy, and to the actual pretensions of emperors henry vii and louis iv, respectively.
the imperial claims to dominion in italy mostly manifested themselves, however, in the granting of titles to the various strongmen who had begun to establish their control over the formerly republican cities. most notably, the emperors gave their backing to the visconti of milan, and king wenceslaus created gian galeazzo visconti duke of milan in 1395. other families to receive new titles from the emperors included the gonzaga of mantua, and the este of ferrara and modena.

aftermath[edit]
by the beginning of the early modern period, the kingdom of italy still formally existed but had de facto splintered into completely independent and self-governing city states; this period is sometimes dubbed the "shadow kingdom of italy" in european historiography. its territory had been significantly limited – the conquests of the republic of venice, which considered itself independent of the empire, in the "domini di terraferma" had taken most of northeastern italy outside the jurisdiction of the empire, while the popes claimed full sovereignty and independence in the papal states in central italy. nevertheless, the emperor charles v, owing more to his inheritance of spain and naples than to his position as emperor, was able to establish his dominance in italy to a greater extent than any emperor since frederick ii. he drove the french from milan, prevented an attempt by the italian princes, with french aid, to reassert their independence in the league of cognac, sacked rome and brought the medici pope clement vii to submission, conquered florence where he reinstalled the medici as dukes of florence (and later, grand dukes of tuscany), and, upon the extinction of the sforza line in milan, claimed the territory as an imperial fief and installed his son philip as the new duke.
this new imperial dominance, however, did not remain with the empire, in which charles was succeeded by his brother ferdinand, but rather was transferred by charles to his son, who became king of spain.
nevertheless, the imperial claims to suzerainty remained, and were actually called forth in the early 17th century when the duchy of mantua fell vacant in 1627. emperor ferdinand ii used his rights as feudal overlord to prevent the heir, the french duke of nevers, from taking over the duchy, leading to the war of the mantuan succession, a part of the much larger thirty years' war. in the early 18th century, during the war of the spanish succession, imperial claims to suzerainty were used again to seize mantua in 1708, which was now attached by the austrian habsburgs to the newly conquered duchy of milan.
this was the last notable usage of imperial power, as such, in italy. the austrians retained control of milan and mantua, and intermittently, other territories (notably tuscany after 1737), but the claims to feudal overlordship had become practically meaningless. the imperial claims to italy remained only in the secondary title of the archbishop-elector of cologne to be "arch-chancellor of italy" and in the formal adherence of emperor and diet to various treaties resolving the succession of various northern italian states which were still considered to be imperial fiefs. during the french revolutionary wars, the austrians were driven from italy by napoleon, who set up republics throughout northern italy, and by the treaty of campo formio of 1797, emperor francis ii relinquished any claims over the territories that made up the kingdom of italy. the imperial reorganization carried out in 1799–1803 left no room for imperial claims to italy – even the archbishop of cologne was gone, secularized along with the other ecclesiastical princes.
in 1805, while the holy roman empire was still in existence, napoleon, by now emperor napoleon i, claimed the crown of the kingdom of italy (napoleonic) for himself, putting the iron crown on his head at milan on 26 may 1805. the almost 850 years old holy roman empire itself was abolished the next year on 6 august 1806.

notes[edit]


^ de bello gothico iv 32, pp. 241-245


references[edit]
liutprand, antapodoseos sive rerum per europam gestarum libri vi.
liutprand, liber de rebus gestis ottonis imperatoris.
anonymous, panegyricus berengarii imperatoris (10th century) [mon.germ.hist., script., v, p. 196].
anonymous, widonis regis electio [mon.germ.hist., script., iii, p. 554].
anonymous, gesta berengarii imperatoris [ed. dumueler, halle 1871].
see also[edit]
king of italy
vteitaly articleshistorychronology
prehistory
italic peoples
ancient peoples of italy
pre-nuragic sardinia
nuragic peoples
etruscan civilization
nuragic civilization
phoenician/carthaginian colonies
magna graecia
ancient rome
kingdom
republic
empire
middle ages
italy under odoacer
ostrogoths
byzantium
lombards
the holy roman empire
the sardinian judicates
arabs
normans
guelphs and ghibellines
the italian city-states
the maritime republics
renaissance
italian wars
early modern period
unification
revolutions of 1820
revolutions of 1830
revolutions of 1848
sicilian revolution of 1848
first war of independence
crimean war
second war of independence
expedition of the thousand
third war of independence
capture of rome
monarchy and the world wars
kingdom of italy
colonial empire
world war i
fascist italy
world war ii
resistance
civil war
republic
economic boom
years of lead
years of mud
mani pulite
by topic
citizenship
currency
economy
fashion
flags
genetic
historic states
military
music
postal
railways
geography
peninsula
northern
northwest
northeast
central
southern
south
insular
climate
fauna
flora
mountains
prealps
alps
apennines
volcanology
volcanoes
beaches
canals
caves
earthquakes
islands
lakes
national parks
rivers
valleys
politics
constitution
elections
referendums
foreign relations
missions
judiciary
law enforcement
military
parliament
chamber of deputies
senate
political parties
president
prime minister
council of ministers
regions
provinces
metropolitan cities
comune
municipalities
cities
economy
economic history
milan
naples
rome
turin
regions by gdp
automotive industry
banking
central bank
companies
energy
government debt
science and technology
stock exchange
taxation
telecommunications
internet
tourism
trade unions
transportation
welfare
society
abortion
adoption
billionaires
capital punishment
corruption
crime
demographics
education
secondary
higher
universities
emigration
fathers' rights movement
feminism
gambling
health
healthcare
immigration
lgbt rights
nobility
prostitution
racism
religion
smoking
social class
terrorism
women
culture
duecento
trecento
quattrocento
cinquecento
seicento
settecento
architecture
art
castles
cinema
cuisine
beer
wine
cultural icons
decorations
design
fashion
festivals
folklore
italian language
regional italian
italian literature
italophilia
italophobia
languages
media
newspapers
radio
tv
monuments
music
classical
folk
opera
popular
mythology
national symbols
anthem
emblem
flag
regions
national monument
personification
people
philosophy
public holidays
festa della repubblica
sculpture
sport
traditions
world heritage sites

 italy portal
 category
 commons
 news
quotes
travel
 wikiproject

vtelist of historic states of italyetruscancivilization
lega dei popoli
etruscan dodecapolis
ancientrome
roman kingdom (753 bc–509 bc)
roman republic (509 bc–27 bc)
italy (4th/3rd century bc-476 ad)
sicilia (241 bc–476 ad)
corsica and sardinia (238 bc–455 ad)
roman empire (27 bc–395 ad)
western roman empire (285 ad–476 ad)
praetorian prefecture of italy (337 ad–584 ad)
medievalandearly modernstatesearlyitaliankingdom(476-774)
odoacer's rule (476–493)
ostrogothic rule (493–553)
vandal rule (435–534)
lombard rule (568–774)
duchy of benevento
duchy of friuli
duchy of ivrea
duchy of spoleto
duchy of tridentum
byzantineempire(584-751)
exarchate of ravenna (584–751)
duchy of rome (533–751)
duchy of perugia (554–752)
duchy of the pentapolis (554–752)
exarchate of africa (585–698)
holy roman empire(774/962–1806)and papal states and otherindependentstates
bishopric of bressanone
duchy of castro
commune of rome
republic of cospaia
city of fiume and its district
duchy of ferrara
republic of florence
duchy of florence
republic of genoa
republic of noli
county of gorizia
princely county of gorizia and gradisca
county of guastalla
duchy of guastalla
kingdom of italy
ancona
ceva
finale
march of friuli
patria del friuli (patriarchate of aquileia)
ivrea
istria
mantua
milan
march of montferrat
duchy of montferrat
tyrol
trieste
turin
tuscany
verona
duchy of ivrea
republic of lucca
duchy of mantua
duchy of massa and carrara
duchy of merania
duchy of mirandola
duchy of modena and reggio
duchy of parma
principality of piombino
republic of pisa
duchy of reggio
marquisate of saluzzo
republic of siena
duchy of spoleto
terra sancti benedicti
bishopric of trento
grand duchy of tuscany
duchy of urbino
republic of venice(697–1797)
dogado
stato da màr
domini di terraferma
southern italy(774–1139)byzantine
duchy of amalfi
duchy of gaeta
catepanate of italy
longobardia
theme of lucania
duchy of naples
theme of sicily and byzantine sicily
duchy of sorrento
arab
emirate of bari
emirate of sicily
lombard
principality of benevento
principality of salerno
principality of capua
norman
county of apulia and calabria
county of aversa
county of sicily
principality of taranto
sardinia and corsica(9th century–1420)
judicates
agugliastra
arborea
cagliari
gallura
logudoro
kingdom of sardinia and corsica
corsican republic (1755–1769)
kingdom of sicily(1130–1816) andkingdom of naples(1282–1816)
state of the presidi
duke of san donato
duchy of sora
principality of taranto
neapolitan republic (1647–1648)
malta under the order
gozo
malta protectorate
crown colony of malta
savoy and the savoyard state(from the 10th century)
savoy
county of savoy
county of geneva
duchy of chablais
barony of faucigny
piedmont
duchy of aosta
county of nice
sicily (1713-1720)
sardinia (1720-1861)
french revolutionary  and napoleonic eras(1792–1815)republics
alba
ancona
bergamo
bologna
brescia
cisalpinia
cispadania
crema
italy
liguria
lucca
parthenopea
piedmont
rome
subalpinia
tiberinia
transpadania
monarchies
benevento
etruria
guastalla
italy
lucca and piombino
massa and carrara
naples
pontecorvo
tuscany
elba
corsica
post-napoleonicstates
duchy of genoa (1815–1848)
duchy of lucca (1815–1847)
duchy of massa and carrara (1814–1829)
duchy of modena and reggio (1814–1859)
duchy of parma (1814–1859)
grand duchy of tuscany (1815–1859)
italian united provinces (1831)
provisional government of milan (1848)
republic of san marco (1848–1849)
roman republic (1849)
united provinces of central italy (1859–1860)
kingdom of sardinia (1814–1860)
kingdom of the two sicilies (1816–1861)
kingdom of lombardy–venetia (1815–1866)
papal states (1814–1870)
‹ the template below (navbox subgroup) is being considered for deletion. see templates for discussion to help reach a consensus. ›post-unification
kingdom of italy (1861–1946)
julian march
italian empire (1882–1960)
free state of fiume (1920–1924)
italian social republic (1943–1945)
free territory of trieste (1947-1954)





 
						retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=kingdom_of_italy_(holy_roman_empire)&oldid=883687879"					
categories: states and territories established in the 850sformer kingdomsmonarchy of the holy roman empirekingdom of italy (holy roman empire)establishments in the carolingian empirehidden categories: articles lacking in-text citations from january 2017all articles lacking in-text citationsarticles containing latin-language text 



navigation menu


personal tools

not logged intalkcontributionscreate accountlog in 



namespaces

articletalk 




variants







views

readeditview history 



more





search



 







navigation


main pagecontentsfeatured contentcurrent eventsrandom articledonate to wikipediawikipedia store 



interaction


helpabout wikipediacommunity portalrecent changescontact page 



tools


what links hererelated changesupload filespecial pagespermanent linkpage informationwikidata itemcite this page 



print/export


create a bookdownload as pdfprintable version 



in other projects


wikimedia commons 



languages


العربيةбългарскиčeštinadanskdeutscheestiελληνικάespañolesperantofrançais한국어bahasa indonesiaitalianoქართულიlietuviųnederlands日本語norskoccitanportuguêsрусскийсрпски / srpskisrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиไทยукраїнська中文 
edit links 





 this page was last edited on 16 february 2019, at 23:28 (utc).
text is available under the creative commons attribution-sharealike license;
additional terms may apply.  by using this site, you agree to the terms of use and privacy policy. wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the wikimedia foundation, inc., a non-profit organization.


privacy policy
about wikipedia
disclaimers
contact wikipedia
developers
cookie statement
mobile view



 

 



(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgpageparsereport":{"limitreport":{"cputime":"0.548","walltime":"0.708","ppvisitednodes":{"value":1701,"limit":1000000},"ppgeneratednodes":{"value":0,"limit":1500000},"postexpandincludesize":{"value":186271,"limit":2097152},"templateargumentsize":{"value":21740,"limit":2097152},"expansiondepth":{"value":12,"limit":40},"expensivefunctioncount":{"value":18,"limit":500},"unstrip-depth":{"value":0,"limit":20},"unstrip-size":{"value":322,"limit":5000000},"entityaccesscount":{"value":0,"limit":400},"timingprofile":["100.00%  482.994      1 -total"," 33.97%  164.052      2 template:lang-la"," 29.41%  142.069     10 template:navbox"," 20.18%   97.474      1 template:italy_topics"," 19.31%   93.277      1 template:country_topics"," 14.26%   68.870      1 template:more_footnotes"," 11.12%   53.724      1 template:ambox","  9.59%   46.336      1 template:history_of_italy","  8.78%   42.391      1 template:sidebar_with_collapsible_lists","  7.96%   38.454      1 template:former_monarchies_italian_peninsula"]},"scribunto":{"limitreport-timeusage":{"value":"0.246","limit":"10.000"},"limitreport-memusage":{"value":12446324,"limit":52428800},"limitreport-logs":"table#1 {\n  [\"size\"] = \"tiny\",\n}\ntable#1 {\n  [\"size\"] = \"tiny\",\n}\n"},"cachereport":{"origin":"mw1326","timestamp":"20190217180619","ttl":2073600,"transientcontent":false}}});mw.config.set({"wgbackendresponsetime":844,"wghostname":"mw1326"});});


