



european theatre of world war ii - wikipedia
document.documentelement.classname = document.documentelement.classname.replace( /(^|\s)client-nojs(\s|$)/, "$1client-js$2" );
(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgcanonicalnamespace":"","wgcanonicalspecialpagename":false,"wgnamespacenumber":0,"wgpagename":"european_theatre_of_world_war_ii","wgtitle":"european theatre of world war ii","wgcurrevisionid":883927245,"wgrevisionid":883927245,"wgarticleid":342640,"wgisarticle":true,"wgisredirect":false,"wgaction":"view","wgusername":null,"wgusergroups":["*"],"wgcategories":["webarchive template wayback links","articles with short description","articles to be expanded from may 2013","all articles to be expanded","articles using small message boxes","all articles with unsourced statements","articles with unsourced statements from september 2008","articles with unsourced statements from march 2011","european theatre of world war ii","theaters and campaigns of world war ii"],"wgbreakframes":false,"wgpagecontentlanguage":"en","wgpagecontentmodel":"wikitext","wgseparatortransformtable":["",""],"wgdigittransformtable":["",""],"wgdefaultdateformat":"dmy","wgmonthnames":["","january","february","march","april","may","june","july","august","september","october","november","december"],"wgmonthnamesshort":["","jan","feb","mar","apr","may","jun","jul","aug","sep","oct","nov","dec"],"wgrelevantpagename":"european_theatre_of_world_war_ii","wgrelevantarticleid":342640,"wgrequestid":"xgq68apamfgaahuwplsaaabc","wgcspnonce":false,"wgisprobablyeditable":true,"wgrelevantpageisprobablyeditable":true,"wgrestrictionedit":[],"wgrestrictionmove":[],"wgflaggedrevsparams":{"tags":{}},"wgstablerevisionid":null,"wgcategorytreepagecategoryoptions":"{\"mode\":0,\"hideprefix\":20,\"showcount\":true,\"namespaces\":false}","wgwikieditorenabledmodules":[],"wgbetafeaturesfeatures":[],"wgmediavieweronclick":true,"wgmediaviewerenabledbydefault":true,"wgpopupsshouldsendmoduletouser":true,"wgpopupsconflictswithnavpopupgadget":false,"wgvisualeditor":{"pagelanguagecode":"en","pagelanguagedir":"ltr","pagevariantfallbacks":"en","usepageimages":true,"usepagedescriptions":true},"wgmfispagecontentmodeleditable":true,"wgmfenablefontchanger":true,"wgmfdisplaywikibasedescriptions":{"search":true,"nearby":true,"watchlist":true,"tagline":false},"wgrelatedarticles":null,"wgrelatedarticlesusecirrussearch":true,"wgrelatedarticlesonlyusecirrussearch":false,"wgwmeschemaeditattemptstepoversample":false,"wgpoweredbyhhvm":true,"wgulscurrentautonym":"english","wgnoticeproject":"wikipedia","wgcentralnoticecookiestodelete":[],"wgcentralnoticecategoriesusinglegacy":["fundraising","fundraising"],"wgwikibaseitemid":"q44700","wgscorenotelanguages":{"arabic":"العربية","catalan":"català","deutsch":"deutsch","english":"english","espanol":"español","italiano":"italiano","nederlands":"nederlands","norsk":"norsk","portugues":"português","suomi":"suomi","svenska":"svenska","vlaams":"west-vlams"},"wgscoredefaultnotelanguage":"nederlands","wgcentralauthmobiledomain":false,"wgcodemirrorenabled":true,"wgvisualeditortoolbarscrolloffset":0,"wgvisualeditorunsupportededitparams":["undo","undoafter","veswitched"],"wgeditsubmitbuttonlabelpublish":true,"oreswikiid":"enwiki","oresbaseurl":"http://ores.discovery.wmnet:8081/","oresapiversion":3});mw.loader.state({"ext.gadget.charinsert-styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site.styles":"ready","site.styles":"ready","noscript":"ready","user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site":"ready","user":"ready","user.options":"ready","user.tokens":"loading","ext.cite.styles":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.shared":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.commonprint":"ready","mediawiki.toc.styles":"ready","wikibase.client.init":"ready","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.noscript":"ready","ext.uls.interlanguage":"ready","ext.wikimediabadges":"ready","ext.3d.styles":"ready","mediawiki.skinning.interface":"ready","skins.vector.styles":"ready"});mw.loader.implement("user.tokens@0tffind",function($,jquery,require,module){/*@nomin*/mw.user.tokens.set({"edittoken":"+\\","patroltoken":"+\\","watchtoken":"+\\","csrftoken":"+\\"});
});rlpagemodules=["ext.cite.ux-enhancements","site","mediawiki.page.startup","mediawiki.page.ready","mediawiki.toc","mediawiki.searchsuggest","ext.gadget.teahouse","ext.gadget.referencetooltips","ext.gadget.watchlist-notice","ext.gadget.drn-wizard","ext.gadget.charinsert","ext.gadget.reftoolbar","ext.gadget.extra-toolbar-buttons","ext.gadget.switcher","ext.centralauth.centralautologin","mmv.head","mmv.bootstrap.autostart","ext.popups","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.init","ext.visualeditor.targetloader","ext.eventlogging","ext.wikimediaevents","ext.navigationtiming","ext.uls.eventlogger","ext.uls.init","ext.uls.compactlinks","ext.uls.interface","ext.quicksurveys.init","ext.centralnotice.geoip","ext.centralnotice.startup","skins.vector.js"];mw.loader.load(rlpagemodules);});























 





european theatre of world war ii 
from wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 jump to navigation
jump to search
huge area of heavy fighting across europe
this article is about a world war ii geographical area. for any of the articles on the european history of world war ii, see outline of world war ii and lists of world war ii topics. for the respective u.s. military command, see european theater of operations, united states army.
second european warpart of world war iiadolf hitler and benito mussolini in italydate1 september 1939 – 25 may 1945[1]locationeurope and adjoining regionsresult
decisive allied victory
collapse of nazi germany
collapse of fascist italy
end of world war ii in europe
beginning of the iron curtain and the cold warbelligerents
allies: soviet union[nb 1] united states[nb 2] united kingdom

 india
 canada australia new zealand south africa france

 free france
 poland yugoslavia

 yugoslavia
 greece czechoslovakia belgium netherlands norway brazil luxembourg


 italy (from 1943) romania (from 1944) bulgaria (from 1944) finland (from 1944)


 denmark
axis: germany italy[nb 3]

 albania[nb 4]
 romania[nb 5] hungary bulgaria[nb 6]axis puppet states italian social republic[nb 7] slovakia croatia vichy france[nb 8] nedic regime hellenic state albania[nb 9] quisling regimeco-belligerents finland[nb 10]


 soviet union[nb 11](1939–1941)commanders and leaders
 joseph stalin winston churchill franklin d. roosevelt édouard daladier charles de gaulle władysław raczkiewicz dušan simović josip broz tito alexandros papagos w.l. mackenzie king edvard beneš hubert pierlot pieter sjoerds gerbrandy johan nygaardsvold getúlio vargas christian x pierre dupong pietro badoglio michael i kimon georgiev c.g.e. mannerheim
 adolf hitler  benito mussolini ion antonescu miklós horthy boris iii jozef tiso ante pavelić philippe pétain milan nedić georgios tsolakoglou rexhep mitrovica vidkun quisling risto ryti


 joseph stalinvtecampaigns of world war iieurope
poland
phoney war
winter war
denmark & norway
france & benelux
britain
balkans
eastern front
finland
western front (1944–45)
pacific war

china
pacific ocean
south-east asia
south west pacific
japan
manchuria (1945)
mediterranean and middle east

north africa
horn of africa
mediterranean sea
adriatic
malta
yugoslavia
iraq
syria–lebanon
iran
italy
dodecanese
southern france
other campaigns

atlantic
arctic
strategic bombing
america
french west africa
madagascar
contemporaneous wars

soviet–japanese border conflicts
franco-thai war
ecuadorian–peruvian war
ili rebellion
the european theatre of world war ii, also known as the second european war, was a huge area of heavy fighting across europe, from germany's and the soviet union's joint invasion of poland in september 1939 until the end of the war with the soviet union conquering most of eastern europe along with the german unconditional surrender on 8 may 1945 (victory in europe day). the allied powers fought the axis powers on two major fronts (the eastern front and western front) as well as in a massive air war and in the adjoining mediterranean and middle east theatre.

contents

1 preceding events
2 outbreak of war in europe
3 germany and the ussr partition northern europe
4 war comes to the west
5 air war
6 mediterranean and other european countries
7 eastern front

7.1 initial soviet retreat
7.2 summer campaign of 1942 and stalingrad
7.3 battles after stalingrad
7.4 effects of the eastern front


8 allied invasion of occupied france
9 end of the war in europe
10 see also
11 notes
12 references
13 further reading


preceding events[edit]
main articles: events preceding world war ii in europe and causes of world war ii
germany was defeated in world war i, and the treaty of versailles placed punitive conditions on the country, including significant financial reparations, the loss of territory (some only temporarily), war guilt, military weakening and limitation, and economic weakening. germany was humiliated in front of the world and had to pay very large war reparations. many germans blamed their country's post-war economic collapse and hyperinflation on the treaty's conditions. these resentments contributed to the political instability which made it possible for adolf hitler and his national socialist party to come to power, with hitler's appointment as chancellor of germany in 1933.
after hitler took germany out of the league of nations, mussolini of fascist italy and hitler formed the rome-berlin axis, under a treaty known as the pact of steel. later, the empire of japan, under the government of hideki tojo, would also join as an axis power. japan and germany had already signed the anti-comintern pact in 1939, to counter the perceived threat of the communism of the soviet union. other smaller powers also later joined the axis throughout the war.

outbreak of war in europe[edit]
main article: invasion of poland
germany and the soviet union were sworn enemies, but following the munich agreement, which effectively handed over czechoslovakia (a french and soviet ally, and the only remaining presidential democracy in central europe) to germany, political realities allowed the soviet union to sign a non-aggression pact (the molotov–ribbentrop pact) including a secret clause partitioning poland, the baltic republics and finland between the two spheres of influence.
full-scale war in europe began at dawn on 1 september 1939, when germany used her newly formed blitzkrieg tactics and military strength to invade poland, to which both the united kingdom and france had pledged protection and independence guarantees. on 3 september 1939, britain and france declared war on germany and british troops were sent to france, however neither french nor british troops gave any significant assistance to the poles during the entire invasion, and the german–french border, excepting the saar offensive, remained mostly calm, this period of the war is commonly known as the phoney war.
on 17 september the soviet forces joined the invasion of poland, although remaining neutral with respect to western powers. the polish government evacuated the country for romania. poland fell within five weeks, with its last large operational units surrendering on october 5 after the battle of kock. as the polish september campaign ended, hitler offered to britain and france peace on the basis of recognition of german european continental dominance. on 12 october the united kingdom formally refused.
despite the quick campaign in the east, along the franco-german frontier the war settled into a quiet period. this relatively non-confrontational and mostly non-fighting period between the major powers lasted until may 10, 1940, and was known as the phoney war.

germany and the ussr partition northern europe[edit]
main articles: winter war, norwegian campaign, and operation weserübung
 finnish soldiers during the winter war
several other countries, however, were drawn into the conflict at this time. by 28 september 1939, the three baltic republics felt they had no choice but to permit soviet bases and troops on their territory. the baltic republics were occupied by the soviet army in june 1940, and finally annexed to the soviet union in august 1940.
the soviet union wanted to annex finland and offered a union agreement, but finland rejected it, which caused the soviet union to attack finland on november 30. this began the winter war. after five months of hard fighting, finns were only pushed from a strip of land bordering russia, in spite of soviet numerical superiority, the soviet union gave up attempts to subdue the whole country. in the moscow peace treaty of 12 march 1940, finland ceded 10% of her territory (karelia, salla and petsamo). the finns were embittered over having lost more land in the peace than on the battlefields, and over the perceived lack of world sympathy.
meanwhile, in western scandinavia, germany invaded denmark and norway in april 1940, and in response, britain occupied the faroe islands (a danish territory) and invaded and occupied iceland (a sovereign nation with the king of denmark as its monarch).
sweden was able to remain neutral.

war comes to the west[edit]
main articles: western front (world war ii), battle of france, battle of britain, and the blitz
 german troops in paris after the fall of france
on 10 may the phoney war ended with a sweeping german invasion of the neutral low countries of belgium, the netherlands, and luxembourg, and into france bypassing the french fortifications of the maginot line along the border with germany. after overrunning the netherlands, belgium, and luxembourg, germany turned against france, entering the country through the ardennes on may 13—the french had left this area less well defended, believing its terrain to be impassable for tanks and other vehicles. most allied forces were in flanders, anticipating a re-run of the world war i schlieffen plan, and were cut off from the french mainland. as a result of this, and also the superior german communications and tactics, the battle of france was shorter than virtually all pre-war allied thought could have conceived. it lasted only six weeks. on 10 june italy declared war on both france and the united kingdom, but did not gain any significant success in this campaign. the french government fled paris, and soon, france surrendered on 22 june. in order to further the humiliation of the french people and the country itself, hitler arranged for the surrender document to be signed in the forest of compiègne, in the same railway coach where the german surrender had been signed in 1918. the surrender divided france into two major parts; the northern part under german control, and a southern part under french control, based at vichy and referred to as vichy france, a rump state friendly to germany. many french soldiers, as well as those of other occupied countries, escaped to britain. the general de gaulle proclaimed himself the legitimate leader of free france and vowed to continue to fight. following the unexpected swift victory, hitler promoted 12 generals to the rank of field marshal during the 1940 field marshal ceremony.
vyacheslav molotov, the foreign policy minister of the ussr, which was tied with soviet–german non-aggression treaty, congratulated the germans: "we hand over the most cordial congratulations by the soviet government on the occasion of splendid success of german wehrmacht. guderian's tanks broke through to the sea near abbeville, powered by soviet fuel, the german bombs, that razed rotterdam to the ground, were filled with soviet pyroxylin, and bullet cases, which hit the british soldiers retreating from dunkirk, were cast of soviet cupronickel alloy..."[2]
later, on 24 april 1941, the ussr gave full diplomatic recognition to the vichy government situated in the non-occupied zone in france.[3]
thus, the fall of france left britain and the commonwealth to stand alone. the british prime minister, neville chamberlain, resigned during the battle and was replaced by winston churchill. much of britain's army escaped capture from the northern french port of dunkirk, where hundreds (if not thousands) of tiny civilian boats were used to ferry troops from the beaches to the waiting warships. there is much debate over whether german panzer divisions could have defeated these soldiers alone if they had pressed forward, since the tank divisions were overextended and would require extensive refitting; in any case, hitler elected to follow the advice of the leader of german air forces hermann göring and allow the luftwaffe alone to attack the allied forces until german infantry was able to advance, giving the british a window for the evacuation. later, many of the evacuated troops would form an important part and the center of the army that landed at normandy on d-day.
the british rejected several covert german attempts to negotiate a peace. germany massed their air force in northern german-occupied france to prepare the way for a possible invasion, codenamed operation seelöwe ("sea lion"), deeming that air superiority was essential for the invasion. the operations of the luftwaffe against the royal air force became known as the battle of britain. initially the luftwaffe concentrated on destroying the raf on the ground and in the air. they later switched to bombing major and large industrial british cities in the blitz, in an attempt to draw raf fighters out and defeat them completely. neither approach was successful in reducing the raf to the point where air superiority could be obtained, and plans for an invasion were suspended by september 1940.
during the blitz, all of britain's major industrial, cathedral, and political cites were heavily bombed. london suffered particularly, being bombed each night for several months. other targets included birmingham and coventry, and strategically important cities, such as the naval base at plymouth and the port of kingston upon hull. with no land forces in direct conflict in europe, the war in the air attracted worldwide attention even as sea units fought the battle of the atlantic and a number of british commando raids hit targets in occupied europe. churchill famously said of the raf personnel who fought in the battle: "never in the field of human conflict was so much owed by so many to so few".

air war[edit]
this section needs expansion with: aerial warfare on the eastern front and soviet-based air operations. you can help by adding to it. (may 2013)
 the raf supermarine spitfire, used extensively during the battle of britain
the air war in the european theatre commenced in 1939.
pre-war doctrine had held that waves of bombers hitting enemy cities would cause mass panic and the rapid collapse of the enemy. as a result, the royal air force had built up a large strategic bomber force. by way of contrast, nazi german air force doctrine was almost totally dedicated to supporting the army. therefore, german bombers were smaller than their british equivalents, and germany never developed a fully successful four engined heavy bomber equivalent to the lancaster or b-17, with only the similarly sized heinkel he 177a placed into production and made operational for such duties with the luftwaffe in the later war years.
the main concentration of german raids on british cities was from 7 september 1940 until 10 may 1941 in the most famous air battle of all time, known as the battle of britain. facing odds of four against one the raf held off the luftwaffe, forcing hermann wilhelm göring to withdraw his forces and more importantly indefinitely postpone invasion plans. this proved the first major turning point of the war. after that most of the strength of the luftwaffe was diverted to the war against the soviet union leaving german cities vulnerable to british and later american air bombings. as a result of the victory, great britain was used by u.s and other allied forces as a base from which to begin the d-day landings in june 1944 and the liberation of nazi-occupied western europe. nevertheless, german raids continued on british cities albeit on a smaller and less destructive scale for the rest of the war, and later the v1 flying bomb and v-2 ballistic missile were both used against britain. however, the balance of bomb tonnage being dropped shifted greatly in favour of the raf as bomber command gained in strength. by 1942, bomber command could put 1,000 bombers over one german city.
during the beginning raids of operation barbarossa the luftwaffe wiped out the majority of the soviet air forces. the soviets would only regain their air wing later in the war with the help of the united states.
from 1942 onwards, the efforts of bomber command were supplemented by the eighth air force of the united states army air forces, u.s. army air forces units being deployed to england to join the assault on mainland europe on 4 july 1942. bomber command raided by night and the us forces by day. the "operation gomorrah" raids on hamburg (24 july 1943 – 29 july 1943) caused a firestorm leading to massive destruction and loss of life.
on 14 february 1945, a raid on dresden produced one of the most devastating fires in history. a firestorm was created in the city, and between 18,000 and 25,000 people were killed.[4][5][6] only the hamburg attack, the 9–10 march 1945 firebombing of tokyo and the nuclear attacks on hiroshima (6 august 1945) and nagasaki (9 august 1945) killed more people through a single attack.

mediterranean and other european countries[edit]
main articles: mediterranean and middle east theatre of world war ii and world war ii in yugoslavia
 partisan liberated territory in yugoslavia, may 1943
the mediterranean and middle east theatre was a major theatre of operations during the second world war. the vast size of this theatre included the fighting between the allies and axis in italy, the balkans, southern europe, malta, north africa and the middle east.
prior to the war italy had invaded albania and officially annexed it. mussolini's regime declared war on britain and france on 10 june 1940, and invaded greece on 28 october. however, italian forces were unable to match the nazi successes in northwest europe. italy declared war on greece and invaded the country, but it was not until german intervention that the country was overrun. while the greek campaign was underway, german forces, supported by the italians, hungarians and the bulgarians simultaneously invaded yugoslavia. after the mainland was conquered, germany invaded crete in what is known as the battle of crete. with the balkans secure, germany and her allies attacked the soviet union in the largest land operation in history. the balkans campaign delayed the invasion,[citation needed] and subsequent resistance movements in albania, yugoslavia and greece tied up valuable axis forces.[citation needed] this provided much needed and possibly decisive relief for the soviets.
fighting in southern europe would not resume until axis forces were defeated in north africa. following the axis defeat in africa, allied forces invaded italy and during a prolonged campaign fought their way north through italy. the invasion of italy resulted in the nation switching sides to the allies and the ousting of mussolini. but, in spite of the coup, fascists and occupying german forces retained possession of the northern half of italy. in northern part of italy, the occupying germans installed mussolini as the head of new fascist republican government, the italian social republic or rsi to show that the axis was still in force. but mussolini and his fascists were now puppet rulers under their german patrons.
allied (and mostly pro-soviet) national liberation army of yugoslavia, which got some supplies and assistance from western allies, battled axis powers on the opposite side of the adriatic sea. in late 1944 it was joined with the advancing soviet army and proceeded to push remaining german forces out of the balkans.
by april 1945, german forces were retreating on all fronts in northern italy and occupied yugoslavia, following continuous allied attacks. the campaign, and the fighting in the mediterranean and middle east theatre came to an end on 29 april. on 2 may in italy, field marshal heinrich von vietinghoff, the commander-in-chief of all german forces in the country surrendered to field marshal harold alexander, the supreme commander of all allied forces in the mediterranean area. fighting would, however, continue in greece where a civil war had broke out and end on 1949 after greek government troops aided by the us and britain defeated the communist guerrillas supported by marshall tito and ussr.

eastern front[edit]
main article: eastern front (world war ii)
initial soviet retreat[edit]
 the "big three" allied leaders at the 1945 yalta conference. from left to right: winston churchill (uk), franklin d. roosevelt (us), and joseph stalin (ussr).
on 22 june 1941, germany launched the invasion of the soviet union, code-named operation barbarossa.[7] this invasion, the biggest in recorded history, started the bloodiest conflict in world history; the axis–soviet war, also known as the eastern front.
it is generally accepted as being the most lethal conflict in human history, with over 30 million dead as a result. it involved more land combat than all other world war ii theatres combined.
on the very night of the invasion soviet troops received a directive undersigned by marshal timoshenko and general of the army georgi zhukov that commanded: "do not answer to any provocations" and "do not undertake any actions without specific orders". the early weeks of the invasion were devastating for the soviet army. enormous numbers of soviet troops were encircled in pockets and fell into nazi german hands. in addition to german troops, italian, hungarian and romanian and finnish troops were also involved in the campaign. finland initially declared neutrality; however, with both german and soviet troops on her soil, finland was well prepared to join forces with germany when the soviet union attacked on june 25. the following conflict from 1941 to 1944 is sometimes referred to as the continuation war, as in the continuation of the winter war. spain immediately offered military assistants to the axis by sending volunteers to the eastern front, known as the blue division.
operation barbarossa suffered from several fundamental flaws. the most serious of these was the logistical situation of the attack. the sheer vastness of the distances in the soviet union meant that germany could only advance so far before outrunning their supply chains. by the time the german attack froze to a halt before moscow on december 5, 1941, it literally could not go any further. there simply were not enough supplies reaching the front to conduct proper defensive operations, let alone a proper offense. the timetable that barbarossa was planned to assume that the soviets would collapse before the onset of winter.
during their long retreat, the soviets employed a scorched earth policy. they burnt crops and destroyed utilities as they withdrew before germany. that helped to contribute to the logistical problems that germany experienced. more importantly for them, the soviets also succeeded in a massive and unprecedented removal of their industry from the threatened war zone to protected areas in the east.
the extension of the campaign beyond the length that germany expected meant that the german army suffered hundreds of thousands of casualties in winter conditions, and from the counterattacks of soviet units.
even with their advance having ground to a halt due to a lack of supplies and the onset of winter, germany had conquered a vast amount of territory, including two-fifths of the soviet economy. dislodging them proved difficult and eventually cost the soviet union dearly.
a few months after the invasion began, german troops came to southern approaches to leningrad and laid a siege to the city (known as the siege of leningrad), which was also blocked from the north by finnish forces. finland's c-in-c mannerheim had halted at the river svir and refrained from attacking the city. hitler had ordered that the city of leningrad must "vanish from the surface of the earth", with its entire population exterminated. rather than storming the city, the wehrmacht was ordered to blockade leningrad so as to starve the city to death, while attacking it with bombers and artillery. about one million civilians died in the leningrad siege – 800,000 by starvation. the siege lasted for 872 days. the only overland way into the city was possibly during the winter, across the frozen lake ladoga, between the german and finnish lines.

summer campaign of 1942 and stalingrad[edit]
after enduring the winter of 1941–1942, the german army prepared for further offensive operations. one of the major problems faced by the nazi war machine in world war ii was a shortage of oil. for this reason,[citation needed] germany decided to give up on moscow for the time being, and the summer offensive of 1942 decided to focus on the war in the south, with the target being the oil fields of the caucasus. meanwhile, the soviets had their own plans.
beginning of the campaign turned into a strategic disaster for soviets whose southern flank was nearly destroyed. surviving soviet units were pushed hundreds kilometres to the east and the wehrmacht advance went almost uncontested. but in a major blunder, hitler split army group south into two subgroups, army group a which would attack the caucasus and army group b which would advance towards the city of stalingrad (now volgograd).
indecision by hitler, dissent among the higher-ranked nazi german officers, and extended supply lines combined in a prolonged battle in the streets of stalingrad. germany eventually occupied over 90% of the city, but in an attempt to defeat the remaining soviet defenders almost all german soldiers in the area were funnelled into the ruins of the city. months of bitter hand-to-hand combat in the ruins of the city depleted the german forces, leaving only romanian and hungarian forces to guard the flanks of the stalingrad army group.[citation needed] in operation uranus, the soviets defeated these axis forces as they performed a massive encirclement operation. the axis troops remaining in the city were trapped – cut off from their supply lines and starving, amidst a harsh winter, they were ordered by hitler to fight to the last man.
starved of food, fuel, ammunition, and clothes, the pocket was gradually reduced, with the last portion surrendering on february 2, 1943. in a cynical attempt to prevent the surrender, hitler promoted friedrich paulus, commander of the 6th army to field marshal, because no german of that rank had surrendered before. heavy losses affected both sides in the battle of stalingrad, one of the most costly battles in history. about 1.5 million people perished in this battle, including 100,000 civilians in the city.

battles after stalingrad[edit]
after stalingrad, the initiative had passed from germany but had not yet been seized by the soviets. a desperate counterattack in the spring of 1943 by forces of field marshal erich von manstein temporarily halted the soviet advance. the battle of kursk was the last major offensive by the german army on the eastern front. the soviets had intelligence of what was to come and prepared massive defenses in huge depth in the kursk salient. they stopped the german armored assaults after a maximum penetration of just over 30 miles (48 km). after kursk, the red army got the upper hand and generally was on the offensive for the rest of the war. the large scale of the soviet union allowed it to overcome high losses in manpower and equipment. soviet success prompted a more active allied involvement on the western front of europe because nazi germany was bogged down in a costly defensive war on the east, defending its ever-shrinking occupied territory.
pushing the enemy out of the soviet territory in june 1944 by conducting the large-scale operation bagration, the soviet army proceeded to dismantle the eastern axis powers — romania, bulgaria, and hungary — to liberate other neighboring countries from the german army, and to impose communist-led governments on the "liberated" nations. some of these nations joined the allies and provided troops to fight nazi germany, which was effectively the only remaining axis power in europe by the end of 1944. finland retained its independence the second time, but broke with the axis, at the cost of having to fight its former ally and ceding more territory to the ussr.
by february 1945, the soviets brought the war to the german heartland. the end of the war in europe left the soviet union in control over large areas of central and southeastern europe, in addition to its 1941 conquests in eastern europe.

effects of the eastern front[edit]
more soviet citizens died during world war ii than those of all other countries combined. nazi ideology considered slavs to be "subhuman" and german forces committed ethnically targeted mass murder. civilians were rounded up and burned alive or shot in squads in many cities conquered by the nazis. approximately 27 million soviets, among them more than 20 million civilians in soviet cities and areas, were killed throughout the duration of the war.
at least 7 million red army troops died facing the germans and their allies in the eastern front. the axis forces themselves had lost over 6 million troops, whether by combat or by wounds, disease, starvation or exposure; many others were seized as pows and a substantial part of them died in soviet captivity because of disease or shortage of supplies.
lend-lease supplies from the united kingdom and the united states made very important impact for soviet military forces. supply convoys sailed to soviet ports that were patrolled by nazi u-boats. allied activities before d-day may have tied up only a few divisions in actual fighting, but many more were forced to guard lonely coasts against raids that never came or to man anti-aircraft guns throughout nazi-controlled europe.

allied invasion of occupied france[edit]
main article: western front (world war ii)
 general charles de gaulle, leader of the free french in opposition to pétain's vichy regime
simultaneously with the fall of rome came the long-awaited invasion of france. operation overlord put over 180,000 troops ashore in normandy on june 6, 1944, creating a beachhead that would eventually result in over 3 million allied soldiers on germany's western front. a long grinding campaign six weeks long followed as american, british, and canadian forces were slowly built up in the beachhead, and german forces slowly worn down. when the breakout finally did come it was spectacular, with allied troops very quickly capturing almost all of normandy within days. many german forces that had been fighting in normandy were trapped in the falaise pocket.
incessant bombing of germany's infrastructure and cities caused tremendous casualties and disruption. internally, hitler survived a number of nazi inner assassination attempts. the most serious was the july 20 plot, occurring on july 20, 1944. orchestrated by claus von stauffenberg and involving among others erwin rommel and alfred delp, the plot had intended to place a time bomb in a position to kill hitler but a number of unscheduled factors and operation failures led to its failure. adolf hitler was only slightly injured.
operation overlord was complemented by an invasion of southern france on august 15, 1944, codenamed operation dragoon. by september 1944 three allied army groups were in line against german formations in the west. there was optimism that the war in europe might be over by the end of 1944.
an attempt was made to force the situation with operation market garden (september 17, 1944 – september 25, 1944). the allies attempted to capture bridges with an airborne assault, to open the way into germany and liberate the northern netherlands. since heavier german forces than intelligence had predicted were present, the british 1st airborne division was almost completely destroyed, and the operation failed.
the weather of 1944 combined with a poor situation for the allies led to a stagnant situation on the western front. the americans continued to grind away at the defenders in the battle of hurtgen forest (september 19, 1944 – february 10, 1945). as long as germany stayed on the defence, the allies were hard-pressed to advance rapidly.
that changed when germany mounted a major counteroffensive on december 16, 1944. the ardennes offensive, also called the battle of the bulge, drove back and surrounded some small american units. the allied forces were eventually successful in driving back germany, in what turned out to be their last major advance of the war. the battle officially ended on january 27, 1945.
the final obstacle to the allies was the rhine. it was crossed in march 1945, and the way lay open to the center of germany. the last major german forces in the west were encircled and trapped in the ruhr.

end of the war in europe[edit]
 winston churchill waves to crowds in london on victory in europe day.
main article: end of world war ii in europe
see also: victory in europe day, victory day (9 may), and western front (world war ii)
on april 27, 1945, as allied forces closed in on milan, mussolini was captured by italian partisans. he was trying to flee italy to switzerland and was traveling with a german anti-air battalion. on april 28, mussolini and several of the other fascists captured with him were taken to dongo and executed by firing squad. the bodies were then taken to milan and unceremoniously strung up in front of a filling station.
hitler, learning of mussolini's death, realized that the end had finally come. he remained in berlin, the crumbling nazi capital, even as the city was encircled and trapped by the soviets and the battle of berlin raged. on april 30, adolf hitler, with his wife of one day, eva braun, committed suicide in his bunker to avoid capture by soviet troops. in his last will and testament, hitler appointed grand admiral karl dönitz as the new german leader. but germany lasted only 7 days longer under the "flensburg government" of dönitz. he surrendered unconditionally to the americans, british, and soviets on may 8, 1945.
in late july and august 1945 the potsdam conference finally disbanded the former nazi german state, reversed all german annexations and occupied territories, as well as agreed to jointly occupy and govern, denazify and demilitarize what remained of germany.

see also[edit]


world war ii portal


atlas of the world battle fronts


1943-07-01

1943-11-01

1944-07-01


1944-09-01

1944-12-01

1945-05-01

european-african-middle eastern campaign medal
mediterranean and middle east theatre of world war ii
pacific war
notes[edit]


^ from 1941

^ from 1941

^ until 1943

^ until 1943

^ until 1944

^ until 1944

^ from 1944

^ vichy officially pursued a policy of armed neutrality and conducted military actions against armed incursions from both axis and allied belligerents. the cease fire and pledging of allegiance to the allies of the vichy troops in french north africa during operation torch convinced the axis that vichy could no longer be trusted to continue this policy, so they invaded and occupied the french rump state in november 1942. collaborationist units, such as the milice, continued to fight alongside german troops against french resistance fighters until the liberation of france in 1944.

^ from 1943

^ until 1944

^ see: soviet invasion of poland, winter war, soviet occupation of the baltic states and bessarabia and northern bukovina.


references[edit]


^ germany unconditionally surrendered on 8 may 1945, however a german wehrmacht column continued fighting until the end of the battle of poljana. the independent state of croatia would continue fighting until the end of the battle of odžak on 25 may 1945.

^ [1] archived december 27, 2005, at the wayback machine

^ the isolation of the revolution archived 2006-08-26 at the wayback machine

^ bojan pancevski dresden bombing death toll lower than thought, daily telegraph, 3 october 2008.

^ kate connolly, panel rethinks death toll from dresden raids, the guardian, 3 october 2008.

^ landeshauptstadt dresden (1 october 2008). "erklärung der dresdner historikerkommission zur ermittlung der opferzahlen der luftangriffe auf die stadt dresden am 13./14. februar 1945" (pdf). landeshauptstadt dresden. retrieved 13 february 2010..mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/65/lock-green.svg/9px-lock-green.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d6/lock-gray-alt-2.svg/9px-lock-gray-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/aa/lock-red-alt-2.svg/9px-lock-red-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration{color:#555}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration span{border-bottom:1px dotted;cursor:help}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/wikisource-logo.svg/12px-wikisource-logo.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output code.cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:inherit;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#33aa33;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-right{padding-right:0.2em}

^ amnon sella. 'barbarossa': surprise attack and communication. journal of contemporary history, vol. 13, no. 3, (jul., 1978), pp. 555–583.


further reading[edit]



wikivoyage has a travel guide for world war ii in europe.
churchill, winston (1948–1953), the second world war, 6 vols.
keegan, john (1989). the second world war, hutchinson. isbn 0-09-174011-8.
lee, loyd e. ed. world war ii in europe, africa, and the americas, with general sources: a handbook of literature and research (1997)
murray, williamson and millett, allan r. (2000). a war to be won: fighting the second world war, harvard university press. isbn 0-674-00163-x.
overy, richard (1995). why the allies won pimlico. isbn 0-7126-7453-5.
powaski, ronald e. (2003). lightning war: blitzkrieg in the west, 1940. john wiley. isbn 978-0-471-39431-0.
powaski, ronald e. (2008). lightning war: blitzkrieg in the west, 1940. book sales, inc. isbn 978-0-7858-2097-0.
smith, j. douglas and richard jensen. (2002) world war ii on the web: a guide to the very best sites
weinberg, gerhard l. (2005). a world at arms: a global history of world war ii, cambridge university press. isbn 0-521-44317-2.
vteworld war ii
asia and the pacific
china
south-east asia
north and central pacific
south-west pacific
europe
western
eastern
mediterranean and middle east
north africa
east africa
italy
west africa
atlantic
north america
south america
casualties
military engagements
conferences
commanders
participantsallies.mw-parser-output .nobold{font-weight:normal}(leaders)
australia
belgium
brazil
canada
china
cuba
czechoslovakia
denmark
ethiopia
france
free france (from june 1940)
greece
india
italy (from september 1943)
luxembourg
mexico
netherlands
new zealand
norway
philippines (commonwealth)
poland
south africa
southern rhodesia
soviet union
tuva
united kingdom
united states
puerto rico
yugoslavia
axis andaxis-aligned(leaders)
albania
bulgaria
reorganized national government of the republic of china
independent state of croatia
finland
germany
hungary
free india
iraq
italy (until september 1943)
italian social republic
japan
manchukuo
philippines (second republic)
romania
slovakia
thailand
vichy france
armed neutrality
resistance
albania
austria
belgium
bulgaria
czech lands
denmark
estonia
ethiopia
france
germany
greece
hong kong
italy
japan
jewish
korea
latvia
lithuania
luxembourg
malaya
netherlands
northeast china
norway
philippines
poland
anti-communist
romania
thailand
soviet union
slovakia
western ukraine
vietnam
yugoslavia
monarchists
timelineprelude
africa
asia
europe
1939
poland
phoney war
winter war
atlantic
changsha
china
1940
weserübung
netherlands
belgium
france
armistice of 22 june 1940
britain
north africa
west africa
british somaliland
north china
baltic states
moldova
indochina
greece
compass
1941
east africa
yugoslavia
shanggao
greece
crete
iraq
soviet union (barbarossa)
finland
lithuania
syria and lebanon
kiev
iran
leningrad
gorky
moscow
sevastopol
pearl harbor
the outbreak of the pacific war
hong kong
philippines
changsha
malaya
borneo (1941–42)
1942
burma
changsha
java sea
coral sea
gazala
dutch harbor
 attu (occupation)
kiska
zhejiang-jiangxi
midway
rzhev
blue
stalingrad
singapore
dieppe
el alamein
guadalcanal
torch
1943
tunisia
kursk
smolensk
gorky
solomon islands
 attu
sicily
 cottage
lower dnieper
italy
armistice of cassibile
gilbert and marshall islands
 burma
 northern burma and western yunnan
changde
1944
monte cassino / shingle
narva
korsun–cherkassy
tempest
ichi-go
overlord (battle of normandy - d-day)
neptune
normandy
mariana and palau
bagration
western ukraine
tannenberg line
warsaw
eastern romania
belgrade
paris
dragoon
gothic line
market garden
estonia
crossbow
pointblank
lapland
hungary
leyte
ardennes
bodenplatte
philippines (1944–1945)
burma (1944–45)
1945
vistula–oder
iwo jima
western invasion of germany
okinawa
italy (spring 1945)
borneo
syrmian front
berlin
czechoslovakia
budapest
west hunan
guangxi
surrender of germany
project hula
manchuria
manila
borneo
taipei
atomic bombings
debate
kuril islands
shumshu
surrender of japan
end of world war ii in asia
aspectsgeneralfamines
bengal famine of 1943
chinese famine of 1942–43
greek famine of 1941-1944
dutch famine of 1944–45
vietnamese famine of 1945

air warfare of world war ii
blitzkrieg
comparative military ranks
cryptography
diplomacy
home front
united states
australian
united kingdom
lend-lease
manhattan project
military awards
military equipment
military production
nazi plunder
opposition
technology
allied cooperation
total war
strategic bombing
puppet states
women
art and world war ii
aftermath
expulsion of germans
operation paperclip
operation osoaviakhim
operation keelhaul
occupation of germany
territorial changes of germany
soviet occupations
romania
poland
hungary
baltic states
occupation of japan
first indochina war
indonesian national revolution
cold war
decolonization
treaty on the final settlement with respect to germany
popular culture
war crimes
allied war crimes
soviet war crimes
british war crimes
united states war crimes
german (forced labour) / wehrmacht war crimes
holocaust
aftermath
response
prosecution
italian war crimes
japanese war crimes
unit 731
prosecution
croatian war crimes
against the serbs
against the jews
romanian war crimes
wartimesexual violence
german military brothels
camp brothels
rape during the occupation of japan
sook ching
comfort women
rape of nanking
rape of manila
rape during the occupation of germany
rape during the liberation of france
rape during the soviet occupation of poland
prisoners
finnish prisoners of war in the soviet union
german prisoners of war in the soviet union
german prisoners of war in the united states
italian prisoners of war in the soviet union
japanese prisoners of war in the soviet union
japanese prisoners of war in world war ii
german mistreatment of soviet prisoners of war
polish prisoners of war in the soviet union
romanian prisoners of war in the soviet union
soviet prisoners of war in finland

bibliography
category
portal




 
						retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=european_theatre_of_world_war_ii&oldid=883927245"					
categories: european theatre of world war iitheaters and campaigns of world war iihidden categories: webarchive template wayback linksarticles with short descriptionarticles to be expanded from may 2013all articles to be expandedarticles using small message boxesall articles with unsourced statementsarticles with unsourced statements from september 2008articles with unsourced statements from march 2011 



navigation menu


personal tools

not logged intalkcontributionscreate accountlog in 



namespaces

articletalk 




variants







views

readeditview history 



more





search



 







navigation


main pagecontentsfeatured contentcurrent eventsrandom articledonate to wikipediawikipedia store 



interaction


helpabout wikipediacommunity portalrecent changescontact page 



tools


what links hererelated changesupload filespecial pagespermanent linkpage informationwikidata itemcite this page 



print/export


create a bookdownload as pdfprintable version 



in other projects


wikimedia commonswikivoyage 



languages


العربيةaragonésespañol한국어bahasa indonesiaitalianolietuviųbahasa melayunederlandsromânăslovenščinaсрпски / srpskisrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиsvenskatürkçeукраїнськаtiếng việt中文 
edit links 





 this page was last edited on 18 february 2019, at 14:01 (utc).
text is available under the creative commons attribution-sharealike license;
additional terms may apply.  by using this site, you agree to the terms of use and privacy policy. wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the wikimedia foundation, inc., a non-profit organization.


privacy policy
about wikipedia
disclaimers
contact wikipedia
developers
cookie statement
mobile view



 

 



(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgpageparsereport":{"limitreport":{"cputime":"0.812","walltime":"1.151","ppvisitednodes":{"value":8229,"limit":1000000},"ppgeneratednodes":{"value":0,"limit":1500000},"postexpandincludesize":{"value":226834,"limit":2097152},"templateargumentsize":{"value":17665,"limit":2097152},"expansiondepth":{"value":12,"limit":40},"expensivefunctioncount":{"value":4,"limit":500},"unstrip-depth":{"value":1,"limit":20},"unstrip-size":{"value":21159,"limit":5000000},"entityaccesscount":{"value":1,"limit":400},"timingprofile":["100.00%  745.527      1 -total"," 36.83%  274.547      1 template:infobox_military_conflict"," 13.57%  101.133      2 template:reflist","  9.10%   67.833      1 template:cite_web","  8.92%   66.492      4 template:citation_needed","  8.76%   65.302      6 template:military_navigation","  8.27%   61.676     18 template:flagcountry","  7.71%   57.479     15 template:flag","  7.69%   57.299      4 template:fix","  7.09%   52.826      4 template:isbn"]},"scribunto":{"limitreport-timeusage":{"value":"0.223","limit":"10.000"},"limitreport-memusage":{"value":6526112,"limit":52428800}},"cachereport":{"origin":"mw1347","timestamp":"20190218140138","ttl":2073600,"transientcontent":false}}});mw.config.set({"wgbackendresponsetime":93,"wghostname":"mw1253"});});


