



battle of the atlantic - wikipedia
document.documentelement.classname = document.documentelement.classname.replace( /(^|\s)client-nojs(\s|$)/, "$1client-js$2" );
(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgcanonicalnamespace":"","wgcanonicalspecialpagename":false,"wgnamespacenumber":0,"wgpagename":"battle_of_the_atlantic","wgtitle":"battle of the atlantic","wgcurrevisionid":883399770,"wgrevisionid":883399770,"wgarticleid":57765,"wgisarticle":true,"wgisredirect":false,"wgaction":"view","wgusername":null,"wgusergroups":["*"],"wgcategories":["webarchive template wayback links","engvarb from july 2018","use mdy dates from june 2013","wikipedia articles needing page number citations from march 2011","wikipedia articles needing page number citations from december 2017","articles needing additional references from july 2015","all articles needing additional references","all articles with unsourced statements","articles with unsourced statements from january 2011","articles with unsourced statements from march 2015","articles with unsourced statements from february 2007","wikipedia articles needing page number citations from may 2013","wikipedia articles needing clarification from september 2017","all articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases","articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from may 2013","articles with unsourced statements from june 2014","cs1 portuguese-language sources (pt)","cs1 italian-language sources (it)","cs1 german-language sources (de)","articles with portuguese-language external links","battle of the atlantic","north atlantic convoys of world war ii","world war ii merchant ships of the united kingdom","naval battles of world war ii involving canada","naval battles of world war ii involving france","naval battles of world war ii involving germany","naval battles of world war ii involving poland","naval battles of world war ii involving italy","campaigns, operations and battles of world war ii involving the united kingdom","naval battles of world war ii involving the united states","naval battles of world war ii involving norway","american theater of world war ii","military history of the atlantic ocean","battles of world war ii involving canada","military history of canada during world war ii"],"wgbreakframes":false,"wgpagecontentlanguage":"en","wgpagecontentmodel":"wikitext","wgseparatortransformtable":["",""],"wgdigittransformtable":["",""],"wgdefaultdateformat":"dmy","wgmonthnames":["","january","february","march","april","may","june","july","august","september","october","november","december"],"wgmonthnamesshort":["","jan","feb","mar","apr","may","jun","jul","aug","sep","oct","nov","dec"],"wgrelevantpagename":"battle_of_the_atlantic","wgrelevantarticleid":57765,"wgrequestid":"xggeowpaaemaajvzbg4aaaad","wgcspnonce":false,"wgisprobablyeditable":true,"wgrelevantpageisprobablyeditable":true,"wgrestrictionedit":[],"wgrestrictionmove":[],"wgflaggedrevsparams":{"tags":{}},"wgstablerevisionid":null,"wgcategorytreepagecategoryoptions":"{\"mode\":0,\"hideprefix\":20,\"showcount\":true,\"namespaces\":false}","wgwikieditorenabledmodules":[],"wgbetafeaturesfeatures":[],"wgmediavieweronclick":true,"wgmediaviewerenabledbydefault":true,"wgpopupsshouldsendmoduletouser":true,"wgpopupsconflictswithnavpopupgadget":false,"wgvisualeditor":{"pagelanguagecode":"en","pagelanguagedir":"ltr","pagevariantfallbacks":"en","usepageimages":true,"usepagedescriptions":true},"wgmfispagecontentmodeleditable":true,"wgmfenablefontchanger":true,"wgmfdisplaywikibasedescriptions":{"search":true,"nearby":true,"watchlist":true,"tagline":false},"wgrelatedarticles":null,"wgrelatedarticlesusecirrussearch":true,"wgrelatedarticlesonlyusecirrussearch":false,"wgwmeschemaeditattemptstepoversample":false,"wgpoweredbyhhvm":true,"wgulscurrentautonym":"english","wgnoticeproject":"wikipedia","wgcentralnoticecookiestodelete":[],"wgcentralnoticecategoriesusinglegacy":["fundraising","fundraising"],"wgwikibaseitemid":"q157627","wgscorenotelanguages":{"arabic":"العربية","catalan":"català","deutsch":"deutsch","english":"english","espanol":"español","italiano":"italiano","nederlands":"nederlands","norsk":"norsk","portugues":"português","suomi":"suomi","svenska":"svenska","vlaams":"west-vlams"},"wgscoredefaultnotelanguage":"nederlands","wgcentralauthmobiledomain":false,"wgcodemirrorenabled":true,"wgvisualeditortoolbarscrolloffset":0,"wgvisualeditorunsupportededitparams":["undo","undoafter","veswitched"],"wgeditsubmitbuttonlabelpublish":true,"oreswikiid":"enwiki","oresbaseurl":"http://ores.discovery.wmnet:8081/","oresapiversion":3});mw.loader.state({"ext.gadget.charinsert-styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site.styles":"ready","site.styles":"ready","noscript":"ready","user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site":"ready","user":"ready","user.options":"ready","user.tokens":"loading","ext.cite.styles":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.shared":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.commonprint":"ready","mediawiki.toc.styles":"ready","wikibase.client.init":"ready","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.noscript":"ready","ext.uls.interlanguage":"ready","ext.wikimediabadges":"ready","ext.3d.styles":"ready","mediawiki.skinning.interface":"ready","skins.vector.styles":"ready"});mw.loader.implement("user.tokens@0tffind",function($,jquery,require,module){/*@nomin*/mw.user.tokens.set({"edittoken":"+\\","patroltoken":"+\\","watchtoken":"+\\","csrftoken":"+\\"});
});rlpagemodules=["ext.cite.ux-enhancements","site","mediawiki.page.startup","mediawiki.page.ready","mediawiki.toc","mediawiki.searchsuggest","ext.gadget.teahouse","ext.gadget.referencetooltips","ext.gadget.watchlist-notice","ext.gadget.drn-wizard","ext.gadget.charinsert","ext.gadget.reftoolbar","ext.gadget.extra-toolbar-buttons","ext.gadget.switcher","ext.centralauth.centralautologin","mmv.head","mmv.bootstrap.autostart","ext.popups","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.init","ext.visualeditor.targetloader","ext.eventlogging","ext.wikimediaevents","ext.navigationtiming","ext.uls.eventlogger","ext.uls.init","ext.uls.compactlinks","ext.uls.interface","ext.quicksurveys.init","ext.centralnotice.geoip","ext.centralnotice.startup","skins.vector.js"];mw.loader.load(rlpagemodules);});























 





battle of the atlantic 
from wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 jump to navigation
jump to search
for the atlantic naval campaign of world war i, see atlantic u-boat campaign of world war i.


battle of the atlanticpart of the second world warofficers on the bridge of an escorting british destroyer stand watch for enemy submarines, october 1941dateseptember 3, 1939 – may 8, 1945(5 years, 8 months and 5 days)locationatlantic ocean, río de la plata, north sea, irish sea, labrador sea, gulf of st. lawrence, caribbean sea, gulf of mexico, outer banks, arctic oceanresult
allied victorybelligerents
 united kingdom canada united states (1941–45) france (1939–40) free france (1940–45) poland brazil (1942–45) netherlands norway
 germany italy (1940–43)commanders and leaders
 martin e. nasmith (1939–41)  sir percy noble (1941–42)  sir max k. horton (1943–45)  frederick bowhill (1939–41)  philip de la ferté (1941–43)  sir john slessor (1943–45)  dudley pound (1939–43)  leonard w. murray royal e. ingersoll jonas h. ingram
 erich raeder karl dönitz hans-georg von friedeburg martin harlinghausen günther lütjens † angelo parona romolo polacchinicasualties and losses
36,200 sailors killed[1][2]36,000 merchant seamen killed[1][2]3,500 merchant vessels175 warships741 raf coastal command aircraft lost in anti-submarine sorties[3]
~30,000 u-boat sailors killed[4]783 submarines lost47 other warships lost[5]~500 killed17 submarines lost[6]vteatlantic campaign
america
northern barrage
blockade of germany
caribbean
st. lawrence
gibraltar
timeline

river plate
1st happy time
hx 72
sc 7
hx 79
hx 84
hx 90
sc 19
berlin
hx 106
hg 53
ob 293
hx 112
4 april 1941
ob 318
hx 126
denmark strait
bismarck
og 69
og 71
sc 42
hg 73
sc 48
hg 76
2nd happy time
torpedo alley
neuland
on 67
27 march 1942
og 82
6 june 1942
hg 84
sl 78
qs 15
sc 94
on 122
qs 33
on 127
laconia
sc 100
sc 104
hx 212
sl 125
sc 107
casablanca
on 144
on 154
tm 1
sg 19
sc 118
on 166
uc 1
sc 121
hx 228
ugs 6
hx 229/sc 122
black may
ons 5
sc 129
sc 130
ons 18/on 202
sc 143
ons 20/on 206
sept-îles
sl 138/mks 28
sl 139/mks 30
sl 140/mks 31
stonewall
bay of biscay
lyme bay
26 april 1944
13 may 1944
capture of u-505
hx 300
wep 3
bx 141
teardrop

vtecampaigns of world war iieurope
poland
phoney war
winter war
denmark & norway
france & benelux
britain
balkans
eastern front
finland
western front (1944–45)
pacific war

china
pacific ocean
south-east asia
south west pacific
japan
manchuria (1945)
mediterranean and middle east

north africa
horn of africa
mediterranean sea
adriatic
malta
yugoslavia
iraq
syria–lebanon
iran
italy
dodecanese
southern france
other campaigns

atlantic
arctic
strategic bombing
america
french west africa
madagascar
contemporaneous wars

soviet–japanese border conflicts
franco-thai war
ecuadorian–peruvian war
ili rebellion
the battle of the atlantic was the longest continuous military campaign[7][8] in world war ii, running from 1939 to the defeat of germany in 1945, and was a major part of the naval history of world war ii. at its core was the allied naval blockade of germany, announced the day after the declaration of war, and germany's subsequent counter-blockade. it was at its height from mid-1940 through to the end of 1943.
the battle of the atlantic pitted u-boats and other warships of the kriegsmarine (navy) and aircraft of the luftwaffe (air force) against the royal canadian navy, royal navy, united states navy, and allied merchant shipping. convoys, coming mainly from north america and predominantly going to the united kingdom and the soviet union, were protected for the most part by the british and canadian navies and air forces. these forces were aided by ships and aircraft of the united states beginning september 13, 1941.[9] the germans were joined by submarines of the italian royal navy (regia marina) after their axis ally italy entered the war on june 10, 1940.
as an island nation, the united kingdom was highly dependent on imported goods. britain required more than a million tons of imported material per week in order to be able to survive and fight. in essence, the battle of the atlantic was a tonnage war: the allied struggle to supply britain and the axis attempt to stem the flow of merchant shipping that enabled britain to keep fighting. from 1942 onward, the axis also sought to prevent the build-up of allied supplies and equipment in the british isles in preparation for the invasion of occupied europe. the defeat of the u-boat threat was a prerequisite for pushing back the axis. the outcome of the battle was a strategic victory for the allies—the german blockade failed—but at great cost: 3,500 merchant ships and 175 warships were sunk in the atlantic for the loss of 783 u-boats (the majority being type vii submarines) and 47 german surface warships, including 4 battleships (scharnhorst, bismarck, gneisenau, and tirpitz), 9 cruisers, 7 raiders, and 27 destroyers. of the u-boats, 519 were sunk by british, canadian, or other allied forces, while 175 were destroyed by american forces; 15 were destroyed by soviets and 73 were scuttled by their crews before the end of the war for various causes.[5]
the battle of the atlantic has been called the "longest, largest, and most complex" naval battle in history.[10] the campaign started immediately after the european war began, during the so-called "phoney war", and lasted six years, until the german surrender in may 1945. it involved thousands of ships in more than 100 convoy battles and perhaps 1,000 single-ship encounters, in a theatre covering millions of square miles of ocean. the situation changed constantly, with one side or the other gaining advantage, as participating countries surrendered, joined and even changed sides in the war, and as new weapons, tactics, counter-measures and equipment were developed by both sides. the allies gradually gained the upper hand, overcoming german surface raiders by the end of 1942 and defeating the u-boats by mid-1943, though losses due to u-boats continued until the war's end.

contents

1 name
2 background
3 early skirmishes (september 1939 – may 1940)
4 submarine warfare
5 british situation

5.1 'the happy time' (june 1940 – february 1941)
5.2 italian submarines in the atlantic
5.3 asdic


6 great surface raiders
7 escort groups (march – may 1941)
8 the field of battle widens (june – december 1941)

8.1 growing american activity
8.2 catapult aircraft merchantmen
8.3 high-frequency direction-finding
8.4 enigma cipher
8.5 u-boat captured by an aircraft


9 mediterranean diversion
10 operation drumbeat (january – june 1942)
11 battle returns to the mid-atlantic (july 1942 – february 1943)

11.1 ahead-throwing weapons

11.1.1 hedgehog
11.1.2 squid


11.2 leigh light
11.3 metox receiver
11.4 enigma in 1942
11.5 german command centre


12 climax of the campaign (march 1943 – may 1943, "black may")

12.1 convergence of technologies


13 south atlantic (may 1942 – september 1943)
14 final years (june 1943 – may 1945)

14.1 german tactical and technical changes


15 last actions (may 1945)
16 outcomes
17 merchant navy

17.1 united kingdom
17.2 united states
17.3 canada
17.4 norway


18 assessment
19 shipping and u-boat sinkings each month
20 in popular culture

20.1 films
20.2 computer games


21 civilian experience
22 see also
23 references

23.1 notes
23.2 bibliography


24 further reading
25 external links


name[edit]
on 5 march 1941, first lord of the admiralty a. v. alexander asked parliament for "many more ships and great numbers of men" to fight "the battle of the atlantic", which he compared to the battle of france, fought the previous summer.[11] the first meeting of the cabinet's "battle of the atlantic committee" was on march 19.[12] churchill claimed to have coined the phrase "battle of the atlantic" shortly before alexander's speech,[13] but there are several examples of earlier usage.[14]

background[edit]
following the use of unrestricted submarine warfare by germany in the first world war, countries tried to limit, even abolish, submarines. the effort failed. instead, the london naval treaty required submarines to abide by "cruiser rules", which demanded they surface, search[15] and place ship crews in "a place of safety" (for which lifeboats did not qualify, except under particular circumstances)[16] before sinking them, unless the ship in question showed "persistent refusal to stop...or active resistance to visit or search".[17] these regulations did not prohibit arming merchantmen,[18] but doing so, or having them report contact with submarines (or raiders), made them de facto naval auxiliaries and removed the protection of the cruiser rules.[19] this made restrictions on submarines effectively moot.[18]

early skirmishes (september 1939 – may 1940)[edit]
in 1939, the kriegsmarine lacked the strength to challenge the combined british royal navy and french navy (marine nationale) for command of the sea. instead, german naval strategy relied on commerce raiding using capital ships, armed merchant cruisers, submarines and aircraft. many german warships were already at sea when war was declared, including most of the available u-boats and the "pocket battleships" (panzerschiffe) deutschland and admiral graf spee which had sortied into the atlantic in august. these ships immediately attacked british and french shipping. u-30 sank the ocean liner ss athenia within hours of the declaration of war—in breach of her orders not to sink passenger ships. the u-boat fleet, which was to dominate so much of the battle of the atlantic, was small at the beginning of the war; many of the 57 available u-boats were the small and short-range type iis, useful primarily for minelaying and operations in british coastal waters. much of the early german anti-shipping activity involved minelaying by destroyers, aircraft and u-boats off british ports.

 admiral graf spee shortly after her scuttling
with the outbreak of war, the british and french immediately began a blockade of germany, although this had little immediate effect on german industry. the royal navy quickly introduced a convoy system for the protection of trade that gradually extended out from the british isles, eventually reaching as far as panama, bombay and singapore. convoys allowed the royal navy to concentrate its escorts near the one place the u-boats were guaranteed to be found, the convoys. each convoy consisted of between 30 and 70 mostly unarmed merchant ships.
some british naval officials, particularly the first lord of the admiralty, winston churchill, sought a more 'offensive' strategy. the royal navy formed anti-submarine hunting groups based on aircraft carriers to patrol the shipping lanes in the western approaches and hunt for german u-boats. this strategy was deeply flawed because a u-boat, with its tiny silhouette, was always likely to spot the surface warships and submerge long before it was sighted. the carrier aircraft were little help; although they could spot submarines on the surface, at this stage of the war they had no adequate weapons to attack them, and any submarine found by an aircraft was long gone by the time surface warships arrived. the hunting group strategy proved a disaster within days. on 14 september 1939, britain's most modern carrier, hms ark royal, narrowly avoided being sunk when three torpedoes from u-39 exploded prematurely. u-39 was forced to surface and scuttle by the escorting destroyers, becoming the first u-boat loss of the war. another carrier, hms courageous, was sunk three days later by u-29.
escort destroyers hunting for u-boats continued to be a prominent, but misguided, technique of british anti-submarine strategy for the first year of the war. u-boats nearly always proved elusive, and the convoys, denuded of cover, were put at even greater risk.
german success in sinking courageous was surpassed a month later when günther prien in u-47 penetrated the british base at scapa flow and sank the old battleship hms royal oak at anchor,[20] immediately becoming a hero in germany.
in the south atlantic, british forces were stretched by the cruise of admiral graf spee, which sank nine merchant ships of 50,000 grt in the south atlantic and indian ocean during the first three months of war. the british and french formed a series of hunting groups including three battlecruisers, three aircraft carriers, and 15 cruisers to seek the raider and her sister deutschland, which was operating in the north atlantic. these hunting groups had no success until admiral graf spee was caught off the mouth of the river plate between argentina and uruguay by an inferior british force. after suffering damage in the subsequent action, she took shelter in neutral montevideo harbour and was scuttled on 17 december 1939.
after this initial burst of activity, the atlantic campaign quieted down. admiral karl dönitz, commander of the u-boat fleet, had planned a maximum submarine effort for the first month of the war, with almost all the available u-boats out on patrol in september. that level of deployment could not be sustained; the boats needed to return to harbour to refuel, re-arm, re-stock supplies, and refit. the harsh winter of 1939–40, which froze over many of the baltic ports, seriously hampered the german offensive by trapping several new u-boats in the ice. hitler's plans to invade norway and denmark in the spring of 1940 led to the withdrawal of the fleet's surface warships and most of the ocean-going u-boats for fleet operations in operation weserübung.
the resulting norwegian campaign revealed serious flaws in the magnetic influence pistol (firing mechanism) of the u-boats' principal weapon, the torpedo. although the narrow fjords gave u-boats little room for manoeuvre, the concentration of british warships, troopships and supply ships provided countless opportunities for the u-boats to attack. time and again, u-boat captains tracked british targets and fired, only to watch the ships sail on unharmed as the torpedoes exploded prematurely (due to the influence pistol), or hit and failed to explode (because of a faulty contact pistol), or ran beneath the target without exploding (due to the influence feature or depth control not working correctly).[21]  not a single british warship was sunk by a u-boat in more than 20 attacks. as the news spread through the u-boat fleet, it began to undermine morale. the director in charge of torpedo development continued to claim it was the crews' fault.[22] in early 1941 the problems were determined to be due to differences in the earth's magnetic fields at high latitudes[23][page needed] and a slow leakage of high-pressure air from the submarine into the torpedo's depth regulation gear. these problems were solved by about march 1941, making the torpedo a formidable weapon.[24]

submarine warfare[edit]
 grand admiral erich raeder with otto kretschmer (left), who was the most successful german u-boat commander, august 1940
early in the war, dönitz submitted a memorandum to grand admiral erich raeder, the german navy's commander-in-chief, in which he estimated effective submarine warfare could bring britain to its knees because of the country's dependence on overseas commerce.[25] he advocated a system known as the rudeltaktik (the so-called "wolf pack"), in which u-boats would spread out in a long line across the projected course of a convoy. upon sighting a target, they would come together to attack en masse and overwhelm any escorting warships. while escorts chased individual submarines, the rest of the "pack" would be able to attack the merchant ships with impunity. dönitz calculated 300 of the latest atlantic boats (the type vii), would create enough havoc among allied shipping that britain would be knocked out of the war.
this was in stark contrast to the traditional view of submarine deployment up until then, in which the submarine was seen as a lone ambusher, waiting outside an enemy port to attack ships entering and leaving. this had been a very successful tactic used by british submarines in the baltic and bosporus during world war i, but it could not be successful if port approaches were well patrolled. there had also been naval theorists who held submarines should be attached to a fleet and used like destroyers; this had been tried by the germans at jutland with poor results, since underwater communications were in their infancy. (interwar exercises had proven the idea faulty.) the japanese also adhered to the idea of a fleet submarine, following the doctrine of mahan, and never used their submarines either for close blockade or convoy interdiction. the submarine was still looked upon by much of the naval world as "dishonourable", compared to the prestige attached to capital ships. this was true in the kriegsmarine as well; raeder successfully lobbied for the money to be spent on capital ships instead.
the royal navy's main anti-submarine weapon before the war was the inshore patrol craft, which was fitted with hydrophones and armed with a small gun and depth charges. the royal navy, like most, had not considered anti-submarine warfare as a tactical subject during the 1920s and 1930s. unrestricted submarine warfare had been outlawed by the london naval treaty; anti-submarine warfare was seen as 'defensive' rather than dashing; many naval officers believed anti-submarine work was drudgery similar to mine sweeping; and asdic was believed to have rendered submarines impotent. although destroyers also carried depth charges, it was expected these ships would be used in fleet actions rather than coastal patrol, so they were not extensively trained in their use. the british, however, ignored the fact that arming merchantmen, as britain did from the start of the war, removed them from the protection of the "cruiser rules",[19] and the fact that anti-submarine trials with asdic had been conducted in ideal conditions.[26]

british situation[edit]
the german occupation of norway in april 1940, the rapid conquest of the low countries and france in may and june and the italian entry into the war on the axis side in june transformed the war at sea in general and the atlantic campaign in particular in three main ways:

britain lost its biggest ally. in 1940, the french navy was the fourth largest in the world. only a handful of french ships joined the free french forces and fought against germany, though these were later joined by a few canadian-built corvettes. with the french fleet removed from the campaign, the royal navy was stretched even further. italy's declaration of war meant that britain also had to reinforce the mediterranean fleet and establish a new group at gibraltar, known as force h, to replace the french fleet in the western mediterranean.
the u-boats gained direct access to the atlantic. since the english channel was relatively shallow, and was partially blocked with minefields by mid-1940, u-boats were ordered not to negotiate it and instead travel around the british isles to reach the most profitable hunting grounds. the german bases in france, at brest, lorient, and la pallice (near la rochelle), were about 450 miles (720 km) closer to the atlantic than the bases on the north sea. this greatly improved the situation for u-boats in the atlantic, enabling them to attack convoys further west and letting them spend longer time on patrol, doubling the effective size of the u-boat force. the germans later built huge fortified concrete submarine pens for the u-boats in the french atlantic bases, which were impervious to allied bombing until mid-1944 when the tallboy bomb became available. from early july, u-boats returned to the new french bases when they had completed their atlantic patrols.
british destroyers were diverted from the atlantic. the norwegian campaign and the german invasion of the low countries and france imposed a heavy strain on the royal navy's destroyer flotillas. many older destroyers were withdrawn from convoy routes to support the norwegian campaign in april and may and then diverted to the english channel to support the withdrawal from dunkirk. by the summer of 1940, britain faced a serious threat of invasion. many destroyers were held in the channel, ready to repel a german invasion. they suffered heavily under air attack by the luftwaffe's fliegerführer atlantik. seven destroyers were lost in the norwegian campaign, another six in the battle of dunkirk and a further 10 in the channel and north sea between may and july, many to air attack because they lacked an adequate anti-aircraft armament.[27] dozens of others were damaged.
 the german submarine base in lorient, brittany
the completion of hitler's campaign in western europe meant u-boats withdrawn from the atlantic for the norwegian campaign now returned to the war on trade. so at the very time the number of u-boats on patrol in the atlantic began to increase, the number of escorts available for the convoys was greatly reduced.[28]  the only consolation for the british was that the large merchant fleets of occupied countries like norway and the netherlands came under british control. after the german occupation of denmark and norway, britain occupied iceland and the faroe islands, establishing bases there and preventing a german takeover.
it was in these circumstances that winston churchill, who had become prime minister on 10 may 1940, first wrote to president franklin roosevelt to request the loan of fifty obsolescent us navy destroyers. this eventually led to the "destroyers for bases agreement" (effectively a sale but portrayed as a loan for political reasons), which operated in exchange for 99-year leases on certain british bases in newfoundland, bermuda and the west indies, a financially advantageous bargain for the united states but militarily beneficial for britain, since it effectively freed up british military assets to return to europe. a significant percentage of the us population opposed entering the war, and some american politicians (including the us ambassador to britain, joseph p. kennedy) believed that britain and its allies might actually lose. the first of these destroyers were only taken over by their british and canadian crews in september, and all needed to be rearmed and fitted with asdic. it was to be many months before these ships contributed to the campaign.

'the happy time' (june 1940 – february 1941)[edit]
see also: first happy time
 a u-boat shells a merchant ship which has remained afloat after being torpedoed.
the early u-boat operations from the french bases were spectacularly successful. this was the heyday of the great u-boat aces like günther prien of u-47, otto kretschmer (u-99), joachim schepke (u-100), engelbert endrass (u-46), victor oehrn (u-37) and heinrich bleichrodt (u-48). u-boat crews became heroes in germany. from june until october 1940, over 270 allied ships were sunk: this period was referred to by u-boat crews as "the happy time" ("die glückliche zeit").[29] churchill would later write: "...the only thing that ever frightened me during the war was the u-boat peril".[30]
the biggest challenge for the u-boats was to find the convoys in the vastness of the ocean. the germans had a handful of very long-range focke-wulf fw 200 condor aircraft based at bordeaux and stavanger, which were used for reconnaissance. the condor was a converted civilian airliner – a stop-gap solution for fliegerführer atlantik. due to ongoing friction between the luftwaffe and kriegsmarine, the primary source of convoy sightings was the u-boats themselves. since a submarine's bridge was very close to the water, their range of visual detection was quite limited.
the best source proved to be the codebreakers of b-dienst who had succeeded in deciphering the british naval cypher no. 3, allowing the germans to estimate where and when convoys could be expected.
in response, the british applied the techniques of operations research to the problem and came up with some counter-intuitive solutions for protecting convoys. they realised that the area of a convoy increased by the square of its perimeter, meaning the same number of ships, using the same number of escorts, was better protected in one convoy than in two. a large convoy was as difficult to locate as a small one. moreover, reduced frequency also reduced the chances of detection, as fewer large convoys could carry the same amount of cargo, while large convoys take longer to assemble. therefore, a few large convoys with apparently few escorts were safer than many small convoys with a higher ratio of escorts to merchantmen.
instead of attacking the allied convoys singly, u-boats were directed to work in wolf packs (rudel) coordinated by radio. the boats spread out into a long patrol line that bisected the path of the allied convoy routes. once in position, the crew studied the horizon through binoculars looking for masts or smoke, or used hydrophones to pick up propeller noises. when one boat sighted a convoy, it would report the sighting to u-boat headquarters, shadowing and continuing to report as needed until other boats arrived, typically at night. instead of being faced by single submarines, the convoy escorts then had to cope with groups of up to half a dozen u-boats attacking simultaneously. the most daring commanders, such as kretschmer, penetrated the escort screen and attacked from within the columns of merchantmen. the escort vessels, which were too few in number and often lacking in endurance, had no answer to multiple submarines attacking on the surface at night as their asdic only worked well against underwater targets. early british marine radar, working in the metric bands, lacked target discrimination and range. moreover, corvettes were too slow to catch a surfaced u-boat.
pack tactics were first used successfully in september and october 1940, to devastating effect, in a series of convoy battles. on september 21, convoy hx 72 of 42 merchantmen was attacked by a pack of four u-boats, losing eleven ships sunk and two damaged over two nights. in october, the slow convoy sc 7, with an escort of two sloops and two corvettes, was overwhelmed, losing 59% of its ships. the battle for hx 79 in the following days was in many ways worse for the escorts than for sc 7. the loss of a quarter of the convoy without any loss to the u-boats, despite very strong escort (two destroyers, four corvettes, three trawlers, and a minesweeper) demonstrated the effectiveness of the german tactics against the inadequate british anti-submarine methods. on 1 december, seven german and three italian submarines caught hx 90, sinking 10 ships and damaging three others. the success of pack tactics against these convoys encouraged admiral dönitz to adopt the wolf pack as his primary tactic.
nor were the u-boats the only threat. following some early experience in support of the war at sea during operation weserübung, fliegerführer atlantik contributed small numbers of aircraft to the battle of the atlantic from 1940 onwards. these were primarily fw 200 condors and (later) junkers ju 290s, used for long-range reconnaissance. the condors also bombed convoys that were beyond land-based fighter cover and thus defenceless. initially, the condors were very successful, claiming 365,000 tons of shipping in early 1941. these aircraft were few in number, however, and directly under luftwaffe control; in addition, the pilots had little specialised training for anti-shipping warfare, limiting their effectiveness.

italian submarines in the atlantic[edit]
the germans received help from their allies. from august 1940, a flotilla of 27 italian submarines operated from the betasom base in bordeaux to attack allied shipping in the atlantic, initially under the command of rear admiral angelo parona, then of rear admiral romolo polacchini. the italian submarines had been designed to operate in a different way than u-boats, and they had a number of flaws that needed to be corrected (for example huge conning towers, slow speed when surfaced, lack of modern torpedo fire control), which meant that they were ill-suited for convoy attacks, and performed better when hunting down isolated merchantmen on distant seas, taking advantage of their superior range and living standards. while initial operation met with little success (only 65,343 grt sunk between august and december 1940), the situation improved gradually over time, and up to august 1943 the 32 italian submarines that operated there sank 109 ships of 593,864 tons,[31][32][page needed] for 17 subs lost in return, giving them a subs-lost-to-tonnage sunk ratio similar to germany's in the same period, and higher overall.[6] the italians were also successful with their use of "human torpedo" chariots, disabling several british ships in gibraltar.
despite these successes, the italian intervention was not favourably regarded by dönitz, who characterised italians as "inadequately disciplined" and "unable to remain calm in the face of the enemy". they were unable to co-operate in wolf pack tactics or even reliably report contacts or weather conditions and their area of operation was moved away from those of the germans.[33]
amongst the more successful italian submarine commanders that operated in the atlantic were carlo fecia di cossato, commander of the submarine enrico tazzoli, and gianfranco gazzana-priaroggia, commander of archimede and then of leonardo da vinci.[34]

asdic[edit]
this section does not cite any sources. please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (july 2015) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
asdic (also known as sonar) was a central feature of the battle of the atlantic. one crucial development was the integration of asdic with a plotting table and weapons (depth charges and later hedgehog) to make an anti-submarine warfare system.
asdic produced an accurate range and bearing to the target, but could be fooled by thermoclines, currents or eddies, and schools of fish, so it needed experienced operators to be effective. asdic was effective only at low speeds. above 15 knots (28 km/h) or so, the noise of the ship going through the water drowned out the echoes.
the early wartime royal navy procedure was to sweep the asdic in an arc from one side of the escort's course to the other, stopping the transducer every few degrees to send out a signal. several ships searching together would be used in a line, 1–1.5 mi (1.6–2.4 km) apart. if an echo was detected, and if the operator identified it as a submarine, the escort would be pointed towards the target and would close at a moderate speed; the submarine's range and bearing would be plotted over time to determine course and speed as the attacker closed to within 1,000 yards (910 m). once it was decided to attack, the escort would increase speed, using the target's course and speed data to adjust her own course. the intention was to pass over the submarine, rolling depth charges from chutes at the stern at even intervals, while throwers fired further charges some 40 yd (37 m) to either side. the intention was to lay a 'pattern' like an elongated diamond, hopefully with the submarine somewhere inside it. to effectively disable a submarine, a depth charge had to explode within about 20 ft (6.1 m). since early asdic equipment was poor at determining depth, it was usual to vary the depth settings on part of the pattern.
there were disadvantages to the early versions of this system. exercises in anti-submarine warfare had been restricted to one or two destroyers hunting a single submarine whose starting position was known, and working in daylight and calm weather. u-boats could dive far deeper than british or american submarines (over 700 feet (210 m)), well below the 350-foot (110 m) maximum depth charge setting of british depth charges. more importantly, early asdic sets could not look directly down, so the operator lost contact on the u-boat during the final stages of the attack, a time when the submarine would certainly be manoeuvring rapidly. the explosion of a depth charge also disturbed the water, so asdic contact was very difficult to regain if the first attack had failed. it enabled the u-boat to change position with impunity.
the belief asdic had solved the submarine problem, the acute budgetary pressures of the great depression, and the pressing demands for many other types of rearmament meant little was spent on anti-submarine ships or weapons. most british naval spending, and many of the best officers, went into the battlefleet. critically, the british expected, as in the first world war, german submarines would be coastal craft and only threaten harbour approaches. as a result, the royal navy entered the second world war in 1939 without enough long-range escorts to protect ocean-going shipping, and there were no officers[citation needed] with experience of long-range anti-submarine warfare. the situation in royal air force coastal command was even more dire: patrol aircraft lacked the range to cover the north atlantic and could typically only machine-gun the spot where they saw a submarine dive.

great surface raiders[edit]
 the battlecruiser hms hood steaming into battle minutes before she was sunk by the german battleship bismarck on may 24, 1941.
despite their success, u-boats were still not recognised as the foremost threat to the north atlantic convoys. with the exception of men like dönitz, most naval officers on both sides regarded surface warships as the ultimate commerce destroyers.
for the first half of 1940, there were no german surface raiders in the atlantic because the german fleet had been concentrated for the invasion of norway. the sole pocket battleship raider, admiral graf spee, had been stopped at the battle of the river plate by an inferior and outgunned british squadron. from the summer of 1940 a small but steady stream of warships and armed merchant raiders set sail from germany for the atlantic.
the power of a raider against a convoy was demonstrated by the fate of convoy hx 84 attacked by the pocket battleship admiral scheer on 5 november 1940. admiral scheer quickly sank five ships and damaged several others as the convoy scattered. only the sacrifice of the escorting armed merchant cruiser hms jervis bay (whose commander, edward fegen, was awarded a posthumous victoria cross) and failing light allowed the other merchantmen to escape. the british now suspended north atlantic convoys and the home fleet put to sea to try to intercept admiral scheer. the search failed and admiral scheer disappeared into the south atlantic. she reappeared in the indian ocean the following month.
other german surface raiders now began to make their presence felt. on christmas day 1940, the cruiser admiral hipper attacked the troop convoy ws 5a, but was driven off by the escorting cruisers.[35] admiral hipper had more success two months later, on 12 february 1941, when she found the unescorted convoy sls 64 of 19 ships and sank seven of them.[36] in january 1941, the formidable (and fast) battleships scharnhorst and gneisenau, which outgunned any allied ship that could catch them, put to sea from germany to raid the shipping lanes in operation berlin. with so many german raiders at large in the atlantic, the british were forced to provide battleship escorts to as many convoys as possible. this twice saved convoys from slaughter by the german battleships. in february, the old battleship hms ramillies deterred an attack on hx 106. a month later, sl 67 was saved by the presence of hms malaya.
in may, the germans mounted the most ambitious raid of all: operation rheinübung. the new battleship bismarck and the cruiser prinz eugen put to sea to attack convoys. a british fleet intercepted the raiders off iceland. in the battle of the denmark strait, the battlecruiser hms hood was blown up and sunk, but bismarck was damaged and had to run to france.[37] bismarck nearly reached her destination, but was disabled by an airstrike from the carrier hms ark royal, and then sunk by the home fleet the next day.[38] her sinking marked the end of the warship raids. the advent of long-range search aircraft, notably the unglamorous but versatile pby catalina, largely neutralised surface raiders.
in february 1942, scharnhorst, gneisenau and prinz eugen moved from brest back to germany in the "channel dash". while this was an embarrassment for the british, it was the end of the german surface threat in the atlantic. the loss of bismarck, the destruction of the network of supply ships that supported surface raiders, the repeated damage to the three ships by air raids,[a] the entry of the united states into the war, arctic convoys, and the perceived invasion threat to norway had persuaded hitler and the naval staff to withdraw.[39][40][41]
war had come too early for the german naval expansion project plan z. battleships powerful enough to destroy any convoy escort, with escorts able to annihilate the convoy, were never achieved. although the number of ships the raiders sank was relatively small compared with the losses to u-boats, mines, and aircraft, their raids severely disrupted the allied convoy system, reduced british imports, and strained the home fleet.

escort groups (march – may 1941)[edit]
 a historical plaque at the bedford basin in halifax, nova scotia, canada, a major convoy collection area.
the disastrous convoy battles of october 1940 forced a change in british tactics. the most important of these was the introduction of permanent escort groups to improve the co-ordination and effectiveness of ships and men in battle. british efforts were helped by a gradual increase in the number of escort vessels available as the old ex-american destroyers and the new british- and canadian-built flower-class corvettes were now coming into service in numbers. many of these ships became part of the huge expansion of the royal canadian navy, which grew from a handful of destroyers at the outbreak of war to take an increasing share of convoy escort duty. others of the new ships were manned by free french, norwegian and dutch crews, but these were a tiny minority of the total number, and directly under british command. by 1941 american public opinion had begun to swing against germany, but the war was still essentially great britain and the empire against germany.
initially, the new escort groups consisted of two or three destroyers and half a dozen corvettes. since two or three of the group would usually be in dock repairing weather or battle damage, the groups typically sailed with about six ships. the training of the escorts also improved as the realities of the battle became obvious. a new base was set up at tobermory in the hebrides to prepare the new escort ships and their crews for the demands of battle under the strict regime of vice-admiral gilbert o. stephenson.[42]
in february 1941, the admiralty moved the headquarters of western approaches command from plymouth to liverpool, where much closer contact with, and control of, the atlantic convoys was possible. greater co-operation with supporting aircraft was also achieved. in april, the admiralty took over operational control of coastal command aircraft. at a tactical level, new short-wave radar sets that could detect surfaced u-boats and were suitable for both small ships and aircraft began to arrive during 1941.
the impact of these changes first began to be felt in the battles during the spring of 1941. in early march, prien in u-47 failed to return from patrol. two weeks later, in the battle of convoy hx 112, the newly formed 3rd escort group of five destroyers and two corvettes held off the u-boat pack. u-100 was detected by the primitive radar on the destroyer hms vanoc, rammed and sunk. shortly afterwards u-99 was also caught and sunk, its crew captured. dönitz had lost his three leading aces: kretschmer, prien, and schepke.
dönitz now moved his wolf packs further west, in order to catch the convoys before the anti-submarine escort joined. this new strategy was rewarded at the beginning of april when the pack found convoy sc 26 before its anti-submarine escort had joined. ten ships were sunk, but another u-boat was lost.

the field of battle widens (june – december 1941)[edit]
growing american activity[edit]
in june 1941, the british decided to provide convoy escort for the full length of the north atlantic crossing. to this end, the admiralty asked the royal canadian navy on may 23, to assume the responsibility for protecting convoys in the western zone and to establish the base for its escort force at st. john's, newfoundland. on june 13, 1941 commodore leonard murray, royal canadian navy, assumed his post as commodore commanding newfoundland escort force, under the overall authority of the commander-in-chief, western approaches, at liverpool. six canadian destroyers and 17 corvettes, reinforced by seven destroyers, three sloops, and five corvettes of the royal navy, were assembled for duty in the force, which escorted the convoys from canadian ports to newfoundland and then on to a meeting point south of iceland, where the british escort groups took over.

 a sb2u vindicator scout bomber from uss ranger flies anti-submarine patrol over convoy ws-12, en route to cape town, november 27, 1941.  the convoy was one of many escorted by the us navy on "neutrality patrol", before the us officially entered the war.
by 1941, the united states was taking an increasing part in the war, despite its nominal neutrality. in april 1941 president roosevelt extended the pan-american security zone east almost as far as iceland. british forces occupied iceland when denmark fell to the germans in 1940; the us was persuaded to provide forces to relieve british troops on the island. american warships began escorting allied convoys in the western atlantic as far as iceland, and had several hostile encounters with u-boats. a mid-ocean escort force of british, and canadian, and american destroyers and corvettes was organised following the declaration of war by the united states.
in june 1941, the us realised the tropical atlantic had become dangerous for unescorted american as well as british ships. on may 21, ss robin moor, an american vessel carrying no military supplies, was stopped by u-69 750 nautical miles (1,390 km) west of freetown, sierra leone. after its passengers and crew were allowed thirty minutes to board lifeboats, u-69 torpedoed, shelled, and sank the ship. the survivors then drifted without rescue or detection for up to eighteen days. when news of the sinking reached the us, few shipping companies felt truly safe anywhere. as time magazine noted in june 1941, "if such sinkings continue, u.s. ships bound for other places remote from fighting fronts, will be in danger. henceforth the u.s. would either have to recall its ships from the ocean or enforce its right to the free use of the seas."[43]
at the same time, the british were working on a number of technical developments which would address the german submarine superiority. though these were british inventions, the critical technologies were provided freely to the us, which then renamed and manufactured them. in many cases this has resulted in the misconception these were american developments.[citation needed] likewise, the us provided the british with catalina flying boats and liberator bombers, that were important contributions to the war effort.

catapult aircraft merchantmen[edit]
this section does not cite any sources. please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (july 2015) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
 sea hurricane mk ia on the catapult of a cam ship
aircraft ranges were constantly improving, but the atlantic was far too large to be covered completely by land-based types. a stop-gap measure was instituted by fitting ramps to the front of some of the cargo ships known as catapult aircraft merchantmen (cam ships), equipped with a lone expendable hurricane fighter aircraft. when a german bomber approached, the fighter was fired off the end of the ramp with a large rocket to shoot down or drive off the german aircraft, the pilot then ditching in the water and (hopefully) being picked up by one of the escort ships if land was too far away. nine combat launches were made, resulting in the destruction of eight axis aircraft for the loss of one allied pilot.
although the results gained by the cam ships and their hurricanes were not great in enemy aircraft shot down, the aircraft shot down were mostly fw 200 condors that would often shadow the convoy out of range of the convoy's guns, reporting back the convoy's course and position so that u-boats could then be directed on to the convoy. the cam ships and their hurricanes thus justified the cost in fewer ship losses overall.

high-frequency direction-finding[edit]
main article: high-frequency direction finding
this section does not cite any sources. please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (july 2015) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
one of the more important developments was ship-borne direction-finding radio equipment, known as hf/df (high-frequency direction-finding, or huff-duff), which was gradually fitted to the larger escorts. hf/df let an operator determine the direction of a radio signal, regardless of whether the content could be read. since the wolf pack relied on u-boats reporting convoy positions by radio, there was a steady stream of messages to intercept. a destroyer could then run in the direction of the signal and attack the u-boat, or at least force it to submerge (causing it to lose contact), which might prevent an attack on the convoy. when two ships fitted with hf/df accompanied a convoy, a fix on the transmitter's position, not just direction, could be determined. the british also made extensive use of shore hf/df stations, to keep convoys updated with positions of u-boats.
the radio technology behind direction finding was simple and well understood by both sides, but the technology commonly used before the war used a manually-rotated aerial to fix the direction of the transmitter. this was delicate work, took quite a time to accomplish to any degree of accuracy, and since it only revealed the line along which the transmission originated a single set could not determine if the transmission was from the true direction or its reciprocal 180 degrees in the opposite direction. two sets were required to fix the position. believing this to still be the case, german u-boat radio operators considered themselves fairly safe if they kept messages short. the british, however, developed an oscilloscope-based indicator which instantly fixed the direction and its reciprocal the moment a radio operator touched his morse key.  it worked simply with a crossed pair of conventional and fixed directional aerials, the oscilloscope display showing the relative received strength from each aerial as an elongated ellipse showing the line relative to the ship. the innovation was a 'sense' aerial which when switched in, suppressed the ellipse in the 'wrong' direction leaving only the correct bearing. with this there was hardly any need to triangulate—the escort could just run down the precise bearing provided and use radar for final positioning. many u-boat attacks were suppressed and submarines sunk in this way—a good example of the great difference apparently minor aspects of technology could make to the battle.

enigma cipher[edit]
see also: german navy 3-rotor enigma
the way dönitz conducted the u-boat campaign required relatively large volumes of radio traffic between u-boats and headquarters. this was thought to be safe as the radio messages were encrypted using the enigma cipher machine, which the germans considered unbreakable. in addition, the kriegsmarine used much more secure operating procedures than the heer (army) or luftwaffe (air force). the machine's three rotors were chosen from a set of eight (rather than the other services' five).[44] the rotors were changed every other day using a system of key sheets and the message settings were different for every message and determined from "bigram tables" that were issued to operators. in 1939, it was generally believed at the british government code and cypher school (gc&cs) at bletchley park that naval enigma could not be broken. only the head of the german naval section, frank birch, and the mathematician alan turing believed otherwise.[45]

 enigma rotors and spindle
the british codebreakers needed to know the wiring of the special naval enigma rotors, and the destruction of u-33 by hms gleaner (j83) in february 1940 provided this information.[46] in early 1941, the royal navy made a concerted effort to assist the codebreakers, and on may 9 crew members of the destroyer bulldog boarded u-110 and recovered her cryptologic material, including bigram tables and current enigma keys. the captured material allowed all u-boat traffic to be read for several weeks, until the keys ran out; the familiarity codebreakers gained with the usual content of messages helped in breaking new keys.
throughout the summer and autumn of 1941, enigma intercepts (combined with hf/df) enabled the british to plot the positions of u-boat patrol lines and route convoys around them. merchant ship losses dropped by over two-thirds in july 1941, and the losses remained low until november.
this allied advantage was offset by the growing numbers of u-boats coming into service. the type viic began reaching the atlantic in large numbers in 1941; by the end of 1945, 568 had been commissioned.[47] although the allies could protect their convoys in late 1941, they were not sinking many u-boats. the flower-class corvette escorts could detect and defend, but they were not fast enough to attack effectively.

u-boat captured by an aircraft[edit]
an extraordinary incident occurred when a coastal command hudson of 209 squadron captured u-570 on 27 august 1941 about 80 miles south of iceland. squadron leader j. thompson sighted the u-boat on the surface, immediately dived at his target, and released four depth charges as the submarine crash dived. the u-boat surfaced again, a number of crewmen appeared on deck, and thompson engaged them with his aircraft's guns. the crewmen returned to the conning tower while under fire. a few moments later, a white flag and a similarly coloured board were displayed. thompson called for assistance and circled the german vessel. a catalina from 209 squadron took over watching the damaged u-boat until the arrival of the armed trawler 'kingston agate' under lt henry owen l'estrange. the following day the u-boat was beached in an icelandic cove. although no codes or secret papers were recovered, the british now possessed a complete u-boat. after a refit, u-570 was commissioned into the royal navy as hms graph.[48]

mediterranean diversion[edit]
this section does not cite any sources. please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (july 2015) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
in october 1941, hitler ordered dönitz to move u-boats into the mediterranean to support german operations in that theatre. the resulting concentration near gibraltar resulted in a series of battles around the gibraltar and sierra leone convoys. in december 1941, convoy hg 76 sailed, escorted by the 36th escort group of two sloops and six corvettes under captain frederic john walker, reinforced by the first of the new escort carriers, hms audacity, and three destroyers from gibraltar. the convoy was immediately intercepted by the waiting u-boat pack, resulting in a brutal battle. walker was a tactical innovator, his ships' crews were highly trained and the presence of an escort carrier meant u-boats were frequently sighted and forced to dive before they could get close to the convoy. over the next five days, five u-boats were sunk (four by walker's group), despite the loss of audacity after two days. the british lost audacity, a destroyer and only two merchant ships. the battle was the first clear allied convoy victory.
through dogged effort, the allies slowly gained the upper hand until the end of 1941. although allied warships failed to sink u-boats in large numbers, most convoys evaded attack completely. shipping losses were high, but manageable.

operation drumbeat (january – june 1942)[edit]
see also: second happy time
 allied tanker dixie arrow, torpedoed by u-71, in 1942
 an allied convoy heads eastward across the atlantic, bound for casablanca, in november 1942
 depth charge being loaded aboard the corvette hms dianthus at londonderry on august 14, 1942
 hedgehog anti-submarine mortar mounted on the forecastle of the destroyer hms westcott
the attack on pearl harbor and the subsequent german declaration of war on the united states had an immediate effect on the campaign. dönitz promptly planned to attack shipping off the american east coast. he had only 12 type ix boats able to reach us waters; half of them had been diverted by hitler to the mediterranean. one of the remainder was under repair, leaving only five boats for operation drumbeat (paukenschlag), sometimes called by the germans the "second happy time."
the us, having no direct experience of modern naval war on its own shores, did not employ a black-out. u-boats simply stood off shore at night and picked out ships silhouetted against city lights. admiral ernest king, commander-in-chief united states fleet (cominch), who disliked the british, initially rejected royal navy calls for a coastal black-out  or convoy system. king has been criticised for this decision, but his defenders argue the united states destroyer fleet was limited (partly because of the sale of 50 old destroyers to britain earlier in the war), and king claimed it was far more important that destroyers protect allied troop transports than merchant shipping.[citation needed] his ships were also busy convoying lend-lease material to the soviet union, as well as fighting the japanese in the pacific. king could not require coastal black-outs - the army had legal authority over all civil defence - and did not follow advice the royal navy (or royal canadian navy) provided that even unescorted convoys would be safer than merchants sailing individually. no troop transports were lost, but merchant ships sailing in us waters were left exposed and suffered accordingly. britain eventually had to build coastal escorts and provide them to the us in a "reverse lend lease", since king was unable (or unwilling) to make any provision himself.[49]
the first u-boats reached us waters on january 13, 1942. by the time they withdrew on february 6, they had sunk 156,939 tonnes of shipping without loss. the first batch of type ixs was followed by more type ixs and type viis supported by type xiv "milk cow"[50] tankers which provided refuelling at sea. they sank 397 ships totalling over 2 million tons. (as mentioned previously, not a single troop transport was lost.) in 1943, the united states launched over 11 million tons of merchant shipping; that number declined in the later war years, as priorities moved elsewhere.
in may, king (by this time both cominch and cno) finally scraped together enough ships to institute a convoy system. this quickly led to the loss of seven u-boats. the us did not have enough ships to cover all the gaps; the u-boats continued to operate freely during the battle of the caribbean and throughout the gulf of mexico (where they effectively closed several us ports) until july, when the british-loaned escorts began arriving. these included 24 armed anti-submarine trawlers crewed by the royal naval patrol service; many had previously been peacetime fishermen. on july 3, 1942, one of these trawlers, hms le tigre proved her worth by picking up 31 survivors from the american merchant alexander macomb. shortly after le tigre managed to hunt down the u-boat u-215 that had torpedoed the merchant ship, which was then sunk by hms veteran; credit was awarded to le tigre. the institution of an interlocking convoy system on the american coast and in the caribbean sea in mid-1942 resulted in an immediate drop in attacks in those areas. as a result of the increased coastal convoy escort system, the u-boats' attention was shifted back to the atlantic convoys. for the allies, the situation was serious but not critical throughout much of 1942.
operation drumbeat had one other effect. it was so successful that dönitz's policy of economic war was seen, even by hitler, as the only effective use of the u-boat; he was given complete freedom to use them as he saw fit. meanwhile, hitler sacked raeder after the embarrassing battle of the barents sea, in which two german heavy cruisers were beaten off by half a dozen british destroyers. dönitz was eventually made grand admiral, and all building priorities turned to u-boats.

battle returns to the mid-atlantic (july 1942 – february 1943)[edit]
 the tanker ss pennsylvania sun, torpedoed by u-571 on 15 july 1942 (was saved and returned to service in 1943)
with the us finally arranging convoys, ship losses to the u-boats quickly dropped, dönitz realised his u-boats were better used elsewhere. on july 19, 1942, he ordered the last boats to withdraw from the united states atlantic coast; by the end of july 1942 he had shifted his attention back to the north atlantic. convoy sc 94 marked the return of the u-boats to the convoys from canada to britain. the command centre for the submarines operating in the west, including the atlantic also changed, moving to a newly constructed command bunker at the château de pignerolle just east of angers on the loire river. the headquarters was commanded by hans-rudolf rösing.[51]
there were enough u-boats spread across the atlantic to allow several wolf packs to attack many different convoy routes. often as many as 10 to 15 boats would attack in one or two waves, following convoys like sc 104 and sc 107 by day and attacking at night. convoy losses quickly increased and in october 1942, 56 ships of over 258,000 tonnes were sunk in the "air gap" between greenland and iceland.
u-boat losses also climbed. in the first six months of 1942, 21 were lost, less than one for every 40 merchant ships sunk. in august and september, 60 were sunk, one for every 10 merchant ships, almost as many as in the previous two years.
on november 19, 1942, admiral noble was replaced as commander-in-chief of western approaches command by admiral sir max horton. horton used the growing number of escorts becoming available to organise "support groups", to reinforce convoys that came under attack. unlike the regular escort groups, support groups were not directly responsible for the safety of any particular convoy. this gave them much greater tactical flexibility, allowing them to detach ships to hunt submarines spotted by reconnaissance or picked up by hf/df. where regular escorts would have to break off and stay with their convoy, the support group ships could keep hunting a u-boat for many hours. one tactic introduced by captain john walker was the "hold-down", where a group of ships would patrol over a submerged u-boat until its air ran out and it was forced to the surface; this might take two or three days.

ahead-throwing weapons[edit]
in response to the ineffectiveness of depth charges, the british developed ahead-throwing anti-submarine weapons, starting with hedgehog.

hedgehog[edit]
by late 1942, warships started being fitted with the hedgehog anti-submarine spigot mortar, which fired contact-fuzed bombs ahead of the firing ship while the target was still within the asdic beam. unlike depth charges, which were launched behind and to the sides of the attacking ship and disturbed the water, making it hard to track the target because asdic lost contact, hedgehog charges exploded on impact. hedgehog allowed the attacking ship to change course and maintain contact as the target manoeuvred, as well as allowing a normal depth charge attack.
hedgehog solved one of the most pressing problems, keeping asdic contact at short ranges. as range shortened, so did the time taken for the sound pulse to reach, and then return from, the target. eventually, the asdic operator received an echo almost simultaneously with the emitted pulse, a so-called 'instantaneous echo', making target tracking difficult. hedgehog allowed the target to be attacked while within the usable range of the asdic equipment.

squid[edit]
squid was an improvement on 'hedgehog' introduced in late 1943. a three-barreled mortar, it projected 100 lb (45 kg) charges ahead or abeam; the charges' firing pistols were automatically set just prior to launch.[52]
ahead-throwing weapons including hedgehog and squid raised the percentage of kills by british surface ships (1943–45) from 85 kills in 5,174 attacks (1.6%) for depth charges to 47 in 268 attacks (17.5%) for hedgehog, the success rates rising with time.[53]

leigh light[edit]
main article: leigh light
 leigh light fitted to a royal air force coastal command liberator, february 26, 1944
detection by radar-equipped aircraft could suppress u-boat activity over a wide area, but an aircraft attack could only be successful with good visibility. u-boats were relatively safe from aircraft at night for two reasons: 1) radar then in use could not detect them at less than 1 mile; 2) flares deployed to illuminate any attack gave adequate warning for evasive manoeuvres. the introduction of the leigh light by the british in january 1942 solved the second problem, thereby becoming a significant factor in the battle for the atlantic. developed by raf officer h. leigh, it was a powerful and controllable searchlight mounted primarily to wellington bombers and b-24 liberators. these aircraft first made contact with enemy submarines using air-to-surface-vessel (asv) radar. then, about a mile from the target, the leigh light would be switched on. it immediately and accurately illuminated the enemy, giving u-boat commanders less than 25 seconds to react before they were attacked with depth charges. the first confirmed kill using this technology was u-502 on july 5, 1942.[54]
the leigh light enabled the british to attack enemy subs on the surface at night, forcing german and italian commanders to remain underwater especially when coming into port at sub bases in the bay of biscay.[54] u-boat commanders who survived such attacks reported a particular fear of this weapon system since aircraft could not be seen at night, and the noise of an approaching aircraft was inaudible above the din of the sub's engines. subsequently, the common practice of surfacing at night to recharge batteries and refresh air was mostly abandoned as it was safer to perform these tasks during daylight hours when enemy planes could be spotted. a drop in allied shipping losses from 600,000 to 200,000 tons per month was attributed to this device.[55]

metox receiver[edit]
 depth charges detonate astern of the sloop hms starling. she participated in the sinking of 14 u-boats throughout the war
by august 1942, u-boats were being fitted with radar detectors to enable them to avoid sudden ambushes by radar-equipped aircraft or ships. the first such receiver, named metox after its french manufacturer, was capable of picking up the metric radar bands used by the early radars. this not only enabled u-boats to avoid detection by canadian  escorts, which were equipped with obsolete radar sets,[56][page needed] but allowed them to track convoys where these sets were in use.
however, it also caused problems for the germans, as it sometimes detected stray radar emissions from distant ships or planes, causing u-boats to submerge when they were not in actual danger, preventing them from recharging batteries or using their surfaced speed.
metox provided the u-boat commander with an advantage that had not been anticipated by the british.  the metox set beeped at the pulse rate of the hunting aircraft's radar, approximately once per second.  when the radar operator came within 9 miles[clarification needed] of the u-boat, he changed the range of his radar.  with the change of range, the radar doubled its pulse repetition frequency and as a result, the metox beeping frequency also doubled, warning the commander that he had been detected.

enigma in 1942[edit]
see also: cryptanalysis of the enigma § m4 (german navy 4-rotor enigma)
on february 1, 1942, the kriegsmarine switched the u-boats to a new enigma network (triton) that used the new, four-rotor, enigma machines. this new key could not be read by codebreakers; the allies no longer knew where the u-boat patrol lines were. this made it far more difficult to evade contact, and the wolf packs ravaged many convoys. this state persisted for ten months. to obtain information on submarine movements the allies had to make do with hf/df fixes and decrypts of kriegsmarine messages encoded on earlier enigma machines. these messages included signals from coastal forces about u-boat arrivals and departures at their bases in france, and the reports from the u-boat training command. from these clues, commander rodger winn's admiralty submarine tracking room[57] supplied their best estimates of submarine movements, but this information was not enough.
then on october 30, crewmen from hms petard salvaged enigma material from german submarine u-559 as she foundered off port said. this allowed the codebreakers to break triton, a feat credited to alan turing. by december 1942, enigma decrypts were again disclosing u-boat patrol positions, and shipping losses declined dramatically once more.

german command centre[edit]
following the st nazaire raid on 28 march 1942 the german navy, the commander of the kriegsmarine, erich raeder, decided the risk of further seaborne attack was high and relocated the western command centre for u-boats to the château de pignerolle near angers, where a command bunker was built and from where all enigma radio messages between german command and atlantic based operational u-boats were transmitted/received. in jul 1942 hans-rudolf rösing was appointed as fdu west (führer der unterseeboote west). pignerolle became his headquarters.[51]

climax of the campaign (march 1943 – may 1943, "black may")[edit]
after convoy on 154, winter weather provided a brief respite from the fighting in january before convoys sc 118 and on 166 in february 1943, but in the spring, convoy battles started up again with the same ferocity. there were so many u-boats on patrol in the north atlantic, it was difficult for convoys to evade detection, resulting in a succession of vicious battles.
on march 10, 1943, the germans added a refinement to the u-boat enigma key, which blinded the allied codebreakers at bletchley park for 9 days.[58] that month saw the battles of convoys ugs 6, hx 228, sc 121, sc 122 and hx 229. one hundred and twenty ships were sunk worldwide, 82 ships of 476,000 tons in the atlantic, while 12 u-boats were destroyed.
the supply situation in britain was such there was talk of being unable to continue the war, with supplies of fuel being particularly low. the situation was so bad that the british considered abandoning convoys entirely.[59] the next two months saw a complete reversal of fortunes.
in april, losses of u-boats increased while their kills fell significantly. only 39 ships of 235,000 tons were sunk in the atlantic, and 15 u-boats were destroyed. by may, wolf packs no longer had the advantage and that month became known as black may in the u-boat arm (u-bootwaffe). the turning point was the battle centred on slow convoy ons 5 (april–may 1943). made up of 43 merchantmen escorted by 16 warships, it was attacked by a pack of 30 u-boats. although 13 merchant ships were lost, six u-boats were sunk by the escorts or allied aircraft. despite a storm which scattered the convoy, the merchantmen reached the protection of land-based air cover, causing dönitz to call off the attack. two weeks later, sc 130 saw at least three u-boats destroyed and at least one u-boat damaged for no losses. faced with disaster, dönitz called off operations in the north atlantic, saying, "we had lost the battle of the atlantic".[60]
in all, 43 u-boats were destroyed in may, 34 in the atlantic. this was 25% of german u-boat arm (u-bootwaffe) (ubw)'s total operational strength. the allies lost 58 ships in the same period, 34 of these (totalling 134,000 tons) in the atlantic.

convergence of technologies[edit]
see also: raf coastal command during world war ii
 u-848 under attack by a us navy consolidated pb4y-1 liberator in november 1943
the battle of the atlantic was won by the allies in two months. there was no single reason for this; what had changed was a sudden convergence of technologies, combined with an increase in allied resources.
the mid-atlantic gap that had previously been unreachable by aircraft was closed by long-range consolidated b-24 liberators. on 18 march 1943 roosevelt ordered admiral king to transfer 60 liberators from the pacific theatre to the atlantic to combat german u-boats; one of only two direct orders he gave to his military commanders in wwii (the other was regarding operation torch).[61] at the may 1943 trident conference, admiral king requested general henry h. arnold to send a squadron of asw-configured b-24s to newfoundland to strengthen the air escort of north atlantic convoys. general arnold ordered his squadron commander to engage only in "offensive" search and attack missions and not in the escort of convoys. in june, general arnold suggested the navy assume responsibility for asw operations. admiral king requested the army's asw-configured b-24s in exchange for an equal number of unmodified navy b-24s. agreement was reached in july and the exchange was completed in september 1943.[62]
further air cover was provided by the introduction of merchant aircraft carriers (mac ships), and later the growing numbers of american-built escort carriers. primarily flying grumman f4f wildcats and grumman tbf avengers, they sailed with the convoys and provided much-needed air cover and patrols all the way across the atlantic.
larger numbers of escorts became available, both as a result of american building programmes and the release of escorts committed to the north african landings during november and december 1942. in particular, destroyer escorts (similar british ships were known as frigates) were designed, which could be built more economically than expensive fleet destroyers and were more seaworthy than corvettes. not only would there be sufficient numbers of escorts to securely protect convoys, they could also form hunter-killer groups (often centred on escort carriers) to aggressively hunt u-boats.
by spring 1943, the british had developed an effective sea-scanning radar small enough to be carried in patrol aircraft armed with airborne depth charges. centimetric radar greatly improved interception and was undetectable by metox. fitted with it, raf coastal command sank more u-boats than any other allied service in the last three years of the war.[63] during 1943 u-boat losses amounted to 258 to all causes. of this total, 90 were sunk and 51 damaged by coastal command.[64]
allied air forces developed tactics and technology to make the bay of biscay, the main route for france-based u-boats, very dangerous to submarines. the leigh light enabled attacks on u-boats recharging their batteries on the surface at night. fliegerführer atlantik responded by providing fighter cover for u-boats moving into and returning from the atlantic and for returning blockade runners. nevertheless, with intelligence coming from resistance personnel in the ports themselves, the last few miles to and from port proved hazardous to u-boats.
dönitz's aim in this tonnage war was to sink allied ships faster than they could be replaced; as losses fell and production rose, particularly in the united states, this became impossible.

south atlantic (may 1942 – september 1943)[edit]
 brazilian navy on anti-submarine warfare in the south atlantic, 1944.
despite u-boat operations in the region (centred in the atlantic narrows between brazil and west africa) beginning autumn 1940, only in the following year did these start to raise serious concern in washington.[65] this perceived threat caused the us to decide that the introduction of us forces along brazil's coast would be valuable. after negotiations with brazilian foreign minister osvaldo aranha (on behalf of dictator getúlio vargas), these were introduced in second half of 1941.[66]
germany and italy subsequently extended their submarine attacks to include brazilian ships wherever they were, and from april 1942 were found in brazilian waters.[67] on 22 may 1942, the first brazilian attack (although unsuccessful) was carried out by brazilian air force aircraft on the italian submarine barbarigo.[66] after a series of attacks on merchant vessels off the brazilian coast by u-507,[66] brazil officially entered the war on 22 august 1942, offering an important addition to the allied strategic position in the south atlantic.[68]

 u-199 under attack by brazilian air force pby catalina, 31 july 1943.
although the brazilian navy was small, it had modern minelayers suitable for coastal convoy escort and aircraft which needed only small modifications to become suitable for maritime patrol.[69] during its three years of war, mainly in caribbean and south atlantic, alone and in conjunction with the us, brazil escorted 3,167 ships in 614 convoys, totalling 16,500,000 tons, with losses of 0.1%.[70] brazil saw three of its warships sunk and 486 men killed in action (332 in the cruiser bahia); 972 seamen and civilian passengers were also lost aboard the 32 brazilian merchant vessels attacked by enemy submarines.[71] american and brazilian air and naval forces worked closely together until the end of the battle. one example was the sinking of u-199 in july 1943, by a coordinated action of brazilian and american aircraft.[72][73] in brazilian waters, eleven other axis submarines were known to be sunk between january and september 1943—the italian archimede and ten german boats: u-128, u-161, u-164, u-507, u-513, u-590, u-591, u-598, u-604, and u-662.[73][74][75]
by fall 1943, the decreasing number of allied shipping losses in the south atlantic coincided with the increasing elimination of axis submarines operating there.[76] from then on, the battle in the region was lost by germany, even though most of the remaining submarines in the region received an official order of withdrawal only in august of the following year, and with (baron jedburgh) the last allied merchant ship sunk by a u-boat (u-532) there, on 10 march 1945.[77]

final years (june 1943 – may 1945)[edit]
this section does not cite any sources. please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (july 2015) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
 scout cruiser of the brazilian navy launching depth charges to defend allied convoy in the atlantic south.
 u-459, a type xiv supply submarine (known as a "milch cow") sinking after being attacked by a vickers wellington
germany made several attempts to upgrade the u-boat force, while awaiting the next generation of u-boats, the walter and elektroboot types. among these upgrades were improved anti-aircraft defences, radar detectors, better torpedoes, decoys, and schnorchel (snorkels), which allowed u-boats to run underwater off their diesel engines.
germany returned to the offensive in the north atlantic in september 1943 with initial success, with an attack on convoys ons 18 and on 202. a series of battles resulted in fewer victories and more losses for ubw. after four months, bdu again called off the offensive; eight ships of 56,000 tons and six warships had been sunk for the loss of 39 u-boats, a catastrophic loss ratio.
the luftwaffe also introduced the long-range he 177 bomber and henschel hs 293 guided glider bomb, which claimed a number of victims, but allied air superiority prevented them from being a major threat.

german tactical and technical changes[edit]
to counter allied air power, ubw increased the anti-aircraft armament of u-boats, and introduced specially-equipped "flak boats", which were to stay surfaced and engage in combat with attacking planes, rather than diving and evading. these developments initially caught raf pilots by surprise. however, a u-boat that remained surfaced increased the risk of its pressure hull being punctured, making it unable to submerge, while attacking pilots often called in surface ships if they met too much resistance, orbiting out of range of the u-boat's guns to maintain contact. should the u-boat dive, the aircraft would attack. immediate diving remained a u-boat's best survival tactic when encountering aircraft. according to german sources, only six aircraft were shot down by u-flaks in six missions (three by u-441, one each by u-256, u-621 and u-953).
the germans also introduced improved radar warning units, such as wanze. to fool allied sonar, the germans deployed bold canisters (which the british called submarine bubble target) to generate false echoes, as well as sieglinde self-propelled decoys.
the development of torpedoes also improved with the pattern-running flächen-absuch-torpedo (fat), which ran a pre-programmed course criss-crossing the convoy path and the g7es acoustic torpedo (known to the allies as german naval acoustic torpedo, gnat),[78] which homed on the propeller noise of a target. this was initially very effective, but the allies quickly developed counter-measures, both tactical ("step-aside") and technical ("foxer").
none of the german measures were truly effective, and by 1943 allied air power was so strong u-boats were being attacked in the bay of biscay shortly after leaving port. the germans had lost the technological race. their actions were restricted to lone-wolf attacks in british coastal waters and preparation to resist the expected operation neptune, the invasion of france.
over the next two years many u-boats were sunk, usually with all hands. with the battle won by the allies, supplies poured into britain and north africa for the eventual liberation of europe. the u-boats were further critically hampered after d-day by the loss of their bases in france to the advancing allied armies.

last actions (may 1945)[edit]
late in the war, the germans introduced the elektroboot: the type xxi and short range type xxiii. the type xxi could run submerged at 17 knots (31 km/h), faster than a type vii at full speed surfaced, and faster than allied corvettes. designs were finalised in january 1943 but mass-production of the new types did not start until 1944. by 1945, just five type xxiii and one type xxi boats were operational.[citation needed] the type xxiiis made nine patrols, sinking five ships in the first five months of 1945; only one combat patrol was carried out by a type xxi before the war ended, making no contact with the enemy.
as the allied armies closed in on the u-boat bases in north germany, over 200 boats were scuttled to avoid capture; those of most value attempted to flee to bases in norway. in the first week of may, twenty-three boats were sunk in the baltic while attempting this journey.
the last actions in american waters took place on may 5–6, 1945, which saw the sinking of the steamer black point and the destruction of u-853 and u-881 in separate incidents.
the last actions of the battle of the atlantic were on may 7–8. u-320 was the last u-boat sunk in action, by an raf catalina; while the norwegian minesweeper nyms 382 and the freighters sneland i and avondale park were torpedoed in separate incidents, just hours before the german surrender.
the remaining u-boats, at sea or in port, were surrendered to the allies, 174 in total. most were destroyed in operation deadlight after the war.

outcomes[edit]
 seamen raise the white ensign over a captured german u-boat u-190 in st. john's, newfoundland 1945
the germans failed to stop the flow of strategic supplies to britain. this failure resulted in the build-up of troops and supplies needed for the d-day landings. the defeat of the u-boat was a necessary precursor for accumulation of allied troops and supplies to ensure germany's defeat.
victory was achieved at a huge cost: between 1939 and 1945, 3,500 allied merchant ships (totalling 14.5 million gross tons) and 175 allied warships were sunk and some 72,200 allied naval and merchant seamen lost their lives.[1] the vast majority of allied warships lost in the atlantic and close coasts were small warships averaging around 1,000 tons such as frigates, destroyer escorts, sloops, submarine chasers, or corvettes, but losses also included two battleships (royal oak and barham), one battlecruiser (hood), two aircraft carriers (glorious and courageous), three escort carriers (dasher, audacity, and nabob), and seven cruisers (curlew, curacoa, dunedin, edinburgh, charybdis, trinidad, and effingham).[79] the germans lost 783 u-boats and approximately 30,000 sailors killed, three-quarters of germany's 40,000-man u-boat fleet.[2] losses to germany's surface fleet were also significant, with 4 battleships, 9 cruisers, 7 raiders, and 27 destroyers sunk.[5]
losses:



allies
germany


36,200 sailors
30,000 sailors


36,000 merchant seamen



3,500 merchant vessels
783 submarines


175 warships
47 other warships

merchant navy[edit]
this section does not cite any sources. please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (july 2015) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
united kingdom[edit]
during the second world war nearly one third of the world's merchant shipping was british. over 30,000 men from the british merchant navy lost their lives between 1939 and 1945. more than 2,400 british ships were sunk. the ships were crewed by sailors from all over the british empire, including some 25% from india and china, and 5% from the west indies, middle east and africa. the british officers wore uniforms very similar to those of the royal navy. the ordinary sailors, however, had no uniform and when on leave in britain they sometimes suffered taunts and abuse from civilians who mistakenly thought the crewmen were shirking their patriotic duty to enlist in the armed forces. to counter this, the crewmen were issued with an 'mn' lapel badge to indicate they were serving in the merchant navy.
the british merchant fleet was made up of vessels from the many and varied private shipping lines, examples being the tankers of the british tanker company and the freighters of ellerman and silver lines. the british government, via the ministry of war transport (mowt), also had new ships built during the course of the war, these being known as empire ships.

united states[edit]
in addition to its existing merchant fleet, united states shipyards built 2,710 liberty ships totalling 38.5 million tons, vastly exceeding the 14 million tons of shipping the german u-boats were able to sink during the war.

canada[edit]
canada's merchant navy was vital to the allied cause during world war ii. more than 70 canadian merchant vessels were lost. 1,600 merchant sailors were killed, including eight women. information obtained by british agents regarding german shipping movements led canada to conscript all its merchant vessels two weeks before actually declaring war, with the royal canadian navy taking control of all shipping august 26, 1939.
at the outbreak of the war, canada possessed 38 ocean-going merchant vessels. by the end of hostilities, in excess of 400 cargo ships had been built in canada.
with the exception of the japanese invasion of the alaskan aleutian islands, the battle of the atlantic was the only battle of the second world war to touch north american shores. u-boats disrupted coastal shipping from the caribbean to halifax, during the summer of 1942, and even entered into battle in the gulf of st. lawrence.
canadian officers wore uniforms which were virtually identical in style to those of the british. the ordinary seamen were issued with an 'mn canada' badge to wear on their lapel when on leave, to indicate their service.
at the end of the war, rear admiral leonard murray, commander-in-chief canadian north atlantic, remarked, "...the battle of the atlantic was not won by any navy or air force, it was won by the courage, fortitude and determination of the british and allied merchant navy."

norway[edit]
before the war, norway's merchant navy was the fourth largest in the world and its ships were the most modern. the germans and the allies both recognised the great importance of norway's merchant fleet, and following germany's invasion of norway in april 1940, both sides sought control of the ships. norwegian nazi puppet leader vidkun quisling ordered all norwegian ships to sail to german, italian or neutral ports. he was ignored. all norwegian ships decided to serve at the disposal of the allies. the vessels of the norwegian merchant navy were placed under the control of the government-run nortraship, with headquarters in london and new york.
nortraship's modern ships, especially its tankers, were extremely important to the allies. norwegian tankers carried nearly one-third of the oil transported to britain during the war. records show that 694 norwegian ships were sunk during this period, representing 47% of the total fleet. at the end of the war in 1945, the norwegian merchant fleet was estimated at 1,378 ships. more than 3,700 norwegian merchant seamen lost their lives.

assessment[edit]
this section needs additional citations for verification. please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed.find sources: "battle of the atlantic" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · jstor (july 2015) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
it is maintained by some historians[who?] that the u-boat arm came close to winning the battle of the atlantic;  that the allies were almost defeated; and that britain was brought to the brink of starvation. others, including blair[80] and alan levin, disagree; levin states this is "a misperception", and that "it is doubtful they ever came close" to achieving this.[81]
the focus on u-boat successes, the "aces" and their scores, the convoys attacked, and the ships sunk, serves to camouflage the kriegsmarine's manifold failures. in particular, this was because most of the ships sunk by u-boat were not in convoys, but sailing alone, or having become separated from convoys.
at no time during the campaign were supply lines to britain interrupted; even during the bismarck crisis, convoys sailed as usual (although with heavier escorts). in all, during the atlantic campaign only 10% of transatlantic convoys that sailed were attacked, and of those attacked only 10% on average of the ships were lost. overall, more than 99% of all ships sailing to and from the british isles during world war ii did so successfully.
despite their efforts, the axis powers were unable to prevent the build-up of allied invasion forces for the liberation of europe. in november 1942, at the height of the atlantic campaign, the us navy escorted the operation torch invasion fleet 3,000 mi (4,800 km) across the atlantic without hindrance, or even being detected. (this may be the ultimate example of the allied practise of evasive routing.) in 1943 and 1944 the allies transported some 3 million american and allied servicemen across the atlantic without significant loss. by 1945 the usn was able to wipe out in mid-atlantic with little real difficulty a wolf-pack suspected of carrying v-weapons. 
third, and unlike the allies, the germans were never able to mount a comprehensive blockade of britain. nor were they able to focus their effort by targeting the most valuable cargoes, the eastbound traffic carrying war materiel. instead they were reduced to the slow attrition of a tonnage war. to win this, the u-boat arm had to sink 300,000 grt per month in order to overwhelm britain's shipbuilding capacity and reduce its merchant marine strength.
in only four out of the first 27 months of the war did germany achieve this target, while after december 1941, when britain was joined by the us merchant marine and ship yards the target effectively doubled. as a result, the axis needed to sink 700,000 grt per month; as the massive expansion of the us shipbuilding industry took effect this target increased still further. the 700,000 ton target was achieved in only one month, november 1942, while after may 1943 average sinkings dropped to less than one tenth of that figure.
by the end of the war, although the u-boat arm had sunk 6,000 ships totalling 21 million grt, the allies had built over 38 million tons of new shipping.[citation needed]
the reason for the misperception that the german blockade came close to success may be found in post-war writings by both german and british authors. blair attributes the distortion to "propagandists" who "glorified and exaggerated the successes of german submariners", while he believes allied writers "had their own reasons for exaggerating the peril".[80]
dan van der vat suggests that, unlike the us, or canada and britain's other dominions, which were protected by oceanic distances, britain was at the end of the transatlantic supply route closest to german bases; for britain it was a lifeline. it is this which led to churchill's concerns.[82] coupled with a series of major convoy battles in the space of a month, it undermined confidence in the convoy system in march 1943, to the point britain considered abandoning it,[83][84] not realising the u-boat had already effectively been defeated. these were "over-pessimistic threat assessments", blair concludes: "at no time did the german u-boat force ever come close to winning the battle of the atlantic or bringing on the collapse of great britain".[85]

shipping and u-boat sinkings each month[edit]
 merchant ship losses
 u-boat losses
historians disagree about the relative importance of the anti-u-boat measures. max hastings states that "in 1941 alone, ultra [breaking the german code]  saved between 1.5 and two million tons of allied ships from destruction." this would be a 40 percent to 53 percent reduction.[86] a history based on the german archives written for the british admiralty after the war by a former u-boat commander and son-in-law of grand admiral karl dönitz reports that several detailed investigations to discover whether their operations were compromised by broken code were negative and that their defeat ".. was due firstly to outstanding developments in enemy radar ..."[87]  the graphs of the data are colour coded to divide the battle into three epochs—  before the breaking of the enigma code, after it was broken, and after the introduction of centimetric radar, which could reveal submarine conning towers above the surface of the water and even detect periscopes.  obviously this subdivision of the data ignores many other defensive measures the allies developed during the war, so interpretation must be constrained.  codebreaking by itself did not decrease the losses, which continued to rise ominously. more u-boats were sunk, but the number operational had more than tripled.[88] after the improved radar came into action shipping losses plummeted, reaching a level significantly (p=0.99) below the early months of the war.  the development of the improved radar by the allies began in 1940, before the united states entered the war, when henry tizard and a. v. hill won permission to share british  secret research with the americans, including bringing them a cavity magnetron, which generates the needed high-frequency radio waves.[89]  all sides will agree with hastings that "... mobilization of the best civilian brains, and their integration into the war effort at the highest levels, was an outstanding british success story."[90]

in popular culture[edit]
films[edit]
u-boote westwärts!, 1941 propaganda film. action in the north atlantic, 1943 american war film about sailors aboard a liberty ship in the us merchant marine battling a german u-boat. western approaches, 1944 british colour film dramatising the experience of merchant sailors in a lifeboat. the cruel sea, 1953 film about a royal navy escort during the battle. the enemy below, 1956 film about the captain of an american destroyer escort who matches wits with a german u-boat captain. das boot, 1981 german film about a german u-boat and its crew. u-571, 2000 film about a u-boat boarded by disguised united states navy submariners. in enemy hands, 2004 film about american sailors being taken captive by a german u-boat.

computer games[edit]
aces of the deep, 1994 u-boat simulator video game
destroyer command, 2002 naval simulation video game
silent hunter iii, 2005 u-boat simulator video game, third of a series
civilian experience[edit]
the battle of the atlantic also resulted in civilian deaths. hundreds died at sea as they tried to escape the bombs in england and evacuate to safer countries like canada, australia, south africa, new zealand and india.[91] the first civilian casualty came on september 3, 1939, the first day of the second world war. aboard the cunard passenger liner athenia were 1103 passengers, evacuating from liverpool to canada. 118 drowned after the ship was hit by u-30, which attacked in the mistaken belief she was an armed merchant cruiser.[92] the next day, hitler ordered that no more attacks were to be made on passenger ships. despite this, many more ships were torpedoed by german u-boats over the war years, many killing civilians. one of the most famous tragedies was the sinking of ss city of benares, a ship carrying 406 passengers, 100 of whom were children evacuees. the ship was sailing from liverpool to canada, but was torpedoed on the 17th september 1940,[93] killing 87 children and 175 adults 600 miles off the coast of ireland. not all attacks were as deadly, such as the sinking of the city of simla, which sunk off the coast of glasgow en route from london to bombay, but left only 3 dead and 347 survivors.

see also[edit]
arctic convoys of world war ii for the convoys to the ussr
convoy battles of world war ii
betasom, the italian submarine flotilla at bordeaux
blockade of germany (1939–45)
british merchant seamen of world war ii
british security co-ordination
irish mercantile marine during world war ii
list of german u-boat world war ii raiding careers
list of most successful u-boat commanders
list of wolfpacks of world war ii
losses during the battle of the atlantic
the norwegian shipping and trade mission – nortraship
timeline of the battle of the atlantic
monsun gruppe, the german u-boat campaign in the indian ocean
references[edit]
notes[edit]


^ a b c 
white, david (2008). bitter ocean: the battle of the atlantic, 1939–1945. new york, united states: simon & schuster. p. 2. isbn 978-0-7432-2930-2..mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/65/lock-green.svg/9px-lock-green.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d6/lock-gray-alt-2.svg/9px-lock-gray-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/aa/lock-red-alt-2.svg/9px-lock-red-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration{color:#555}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration span{border-bottom:1px dotted;cursor:help}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/wikisource-logo.svg/12px-wikisource-logo.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output code.cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:inherit;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#33aa33;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-right{padding-right:0.2em}

^ a b c bennett, william j (2007). america: the last best hope, volume 2: from a world at war to the triumph of freedom 1914–1989. united states: nelson current. p. 301. isbn 978-1-59555-057-6.

^ bowyer 1979, p. 158

^ bennett, william j (2007). america: the last best hope, volume 2: from a world at war to the triumph of freedom 1914–1989. united states: nelson current. p. 302. isbn 978-1-59555-057-6.

^ a b c british losses & losses inflicted on axis navies. national museum of the royal navy. retrieved feb. 24, 2018.

^ a b giorgerini 2002, p. 424

^ blair 1996a, p. xiii.

^ woodman 2004, p. 1

^ carney, robert b., admiral, usn. "comment and discussion" united states naval institute proceedings january 1976, p.74. admiral carney was assistant chief of staff and operations officer to admiral arthur l. bristol, commander of the support force of united states ships and planes providing north atlantic trade convoy escort services. this support force was designated task force 24 after the declaration of war.

^ david syrett, the defeat of the german u-boats: the battle of the atlantic (1994).

^ "admiralty pleads for ships, men to wage 'battle of the atlantic'". the montreal gazette. the associated press. march 6, 1941.

^ churchill, gilbert, p. 367.

^ gilbert, martin (ed.), the churchill war papers: the ever widening war, volume 3: 1941, p. 314.

^ ernest lindley, "the grand alliance", st. joseph news-press, sept 30, 1940. "until the outcome of the battle of the atlantic can be more clearly foreseen, there would be high risks both to japan and ourselves in becoming engaged in war."sargint, h.j.j., "mighty nazi effort to invade england now in the making: observers see amphibious attack as hitler's anticipated thrust against british isles", miami news, jan. 18, 1941. "this country is fighting a battle which may well be called the battle of the atlantic, though it is not more than an extension of the battle of britain."

^ holwitt, joel i. (2005). execute against japan (ph.d. thesis). ohio state university. pp. 5–6.

^ holwitt 2005, p. 92: quoting article 22 of the london naval treaty.

^ holwitt 2005, p. 93

^ a b holwitt 2005, p. 6

^ a b dönitz, karl. memoirs:  ten years and twenty days; von der poorten, edward p. the german navy in world war ii (t. y. crowell, 1969); milner, marc. north atlantic run : the royal canadian navy and the battle for the convoys (vanwell publishing, 2006)

^ he repeated a great war feat by u-18.

^ similar problems plagued the u.s. navy's mark 14 torpedo. the u.s. ignored reports of german problems. blair, clay, jr. silent victory (bantam, 1976), p.71.

^ the u.s. navy's bureau of ordnance made identical claims.

^ the mark 14s suffered the same problem. blair.

^ williamson, gordon (2010). u-boat tactics in world war ii. oxford: osprey. p. 43. isbn 1-84908-173-5.

^ karl dönitz: gedanken über den aufbau der u-bootswaffe, 1. september 1939. (bundesarchiv-militärarchiv, freiburg, germany, case 378, pg 32419a. seekrieg 1939), cit. holger h. herwig, germany and the battle of the atlantic, chapter 4, page 74 of roger chikering, stig förster and bernd greiner (eds.): a world at total war: global conflict and the politics of destruction, 1937–1945 (cambridge university press, cambridge, england, december 2004, isbn 0-521-83432-5)

^ price, alfred. aircraft versus the submarine

^ between april and july 1940, the royal navy lost 24 destroyers, the royal canadian navy one.

^ convoy archived july 19, 2011, at the wayback machine from history television.

^ purnell, tom (april 11, 2003). "the "happy time"". "canonesa", convoy hx72 & u-100. archived from the original on october 1, 2007. retrieved september 1, 2007.

^ costello & hughes 1977, p. 5

^ giorgerini 2002, pp. 415–563

^ rohwer

^ ireland 2003, pp. 51–52

^ giorgerini 2002, p. 691

^ roskill 1957, pp. 291–292.

^ roskill 1957, p. 372.

^ hms hood 1920 archived december 18, 2008, at the wayback machine, royal navy

^ bismarck (1940–1941), naval historical center

^ koop, gerhard; schmolke, klaus-peter (2014). battleships of the scharnhorst class (english language ed.). barnsley: seaforth publishing. pp. 53–52, 111. isbn 978 1 84832 192 2.

^ garzke, william h.; dulin, robert o. (1985). battleships: axis and neutral battleships in world war ii. annapolis: naval institute press. pp. 145–146. isbn 978-0-87021-101-0.

^ hellwinkel, lars (2014). hitler's gateway to the atlantic. german naval bases in france 1940-1945 (kindle, english translation ed.). barnsley: seaforth publishing. pp. kindle location 731–738 of 4855. isbn 978 184832 199 1.

^ roskill 1957, pp. 358–359.

^ "on the high seas". time magazine. june 23, 1941.

^ erskine, ralph (2004), oxford dictionary of national biography: murray  [née clarke], joan elisabeth lowther (1917–1996): cryptanalyst and numismatist, oxford university press, retrieved 16 november 2014

^ copeland 2004, p. 257

^ sebag-montefiore 2004, p. 76

^ helgason, guðmundur. "type viic". german u-boats of wwii - uboat.net. retrieved 13 february 2010.

^ costello & hughes 1977, p. 168

^ costello & hughes 1977, p. 196

^ costello & hughes 1977, p. 203

^ a b "pignerolle dans la seconde guerre mondiale".

^ costello & hughes 1977, p. 308

^ britain, asw weapons, table british asw during world war ii, http://www.navweaps.com/weapons/wambr_asw.htm

^ a b rickard, j (1 june 2007). "leigh light". history of war. retrieved 16 february 2017.

^ gustin, emmanuel. "the leigh light". retrieved 16 february 2017.

^ north atlantic run; the great naval battle of ottawa

^ costello & hughes 1977, p. 155

^ erskine, ralph; smith, michael (2011). the bletchley park codebreakers. london: biteback publishing, 2011.

^ milner, north atlantic run? van der vat, the atlantic campaign?

^ costello & hughes 1977, p. 281

^ smith, jean edward (2012). eisenhower in war and peace. new york: random house. p. 213. isbn 978-0-679-64429-3.

^ bowling 1969, p. 52

^ buckley 1998, p. 136

^ hendrie 2006, pp. 116–117

^ carey 2004, p. 5-6.

^ a b c carey 2004.

^ carey 2004, p. 9-10.

^ morison 1947, p. 376

^ morison 1947, p. 386

^ votaw, 1950, p. 10579ff, and 1951, p.93.

^ maximiano & neto 2011, p. 6

^ gastaldoni, 1993. from p.153.

^ a b helgason, guðmundur. "loss listings". german u-boats of wwii - uboat.net. retrieved 4 july 2015.

^ carey 2004, p. 119.

^ barone 2013, chapter 2

^ carey 2004, p. 100.

^ carruthers 2011, p. 190

^ fitzsimons, bernard, ed. the illustrated encyclopedia of 20th century weapons and warfare (london: phoebus, 1978), volume 24, p.2615, "zaunkönig".

^ british losses & losses inflicted on axis navies. national museum of the royal navy. counting the "atlantic ocean" and "europe [bar mediterranean]" categories. retrieved feb. 24, 2018.

^ a b blair 1996a, p. xii.

^ levin p375

^ costello & hughes 1977, p. 210

^ roskill 1961, p. 375.

^ milner, north atlantic run; van der vat.

^ blair vol ii, p xii

^ hastings, max (2011). all hell let loose : the world at war 1939-45. london: harperpress. pp. 275–276.

^ hessler, günther (1989). the u-boat war in the atlantic, 1939–1945. london: her majesty's stationery office.2, p. 26.

^ mawdsley, evan (2009). world war ii :  a new history. cambridge: university press. p. 260.

^ snow, c. p. (1961). science and government. london: oxford. pp. 41–46.

^ hastings 2011, p. 81

^ "records of ww2 civilian war dead published online". telegraph. retrieved 2018-12-11.

^ [1]

^ "remembering the city of benares tragedy | the national archives blog". blog.nationalarchives.gov.uk. retrieved 2018-12-11.




^ for a significant part of 1941, the scharnhorst, gneisenau and prinz eugen were all out of service whilst bomb damage was being repaired in the brest naval dockyard. scharnhorst was successfully attacked by the raf at la pallice on 24 july 1941 and repairs took 4 months. gneisenau was hit by a torpedo on 6 april 1941 then bombed again whilst in dry dock, necessitating lengthy repairs, then received minor bomb damage on 18 december. prinz eugen was seriously damaged by a bomb on 1 july 1941 and was under repair for the rest of the year. the resulting demands on the dockyard at brest caused delays in the servicing of u-boats as there was a shortage of workers with the right skills.


bibliography[edit]
.mw-parser-output .refbegin{font-size:90%;margin-bottom:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indents>ul{list-style-type:none;margin-left:0}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indents>ul>li,.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indents>dl>dd{margin-left:0;padding-left:3.2em;text-indent:-3.2em;list-style:none}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-100{font-size:100%}
alexander, c. hugh o'd. (c. 1945). cryptographic history of work on the german naval enigma. ccr 239. kew: the national archives. hw 25/1. retrieved 8 november 2017.
barone, joão (2013). 1942: o brasil e sua guerra quase desconhecida [1942: brazil and its almost forgotten war] (in portuguese). rio de janeiro. isbn 978-85-209-3394-7.
buckley, john (1995). the raf and trade defence, 1919–1945: constant endeavour. ryburn. isbn 978-1-85331-069-0.
buckley, john (1998). air power in the age of total war. ucl press. isbn 978-1-85728-589-5.
blair, clay, jr. (1996a). hitler's u-boat war: the hunters 1939–1942. i. cassell. isbn 978-0-304-35260-9.
blair, clay, jr. (1996b). hitler's u-boat war: the hunted 1942–1945. ii. cassell. isbn 978-0-304-35261-6.
blair, clay, jr. (1976). silent victory: the u.s. submarine war against japan (2nd ed.). new york: bantam. oclc 67926975.
bowling, r. a. (december 1969). escort of convoy: still the only way. united states naval institute proceedings. 95. pp. 46–56. issn 0041-798x.
bowyer, chaz (1979). coastal command at war. shepperton, surrey, uk: ian allan ltd. isbn 978-0-7110-0980-6.
carruthers, bob (2011). the u-boat war in the atlantic: volume iii: 1944–1945. coda books. isbn 978-1-78159-161-1.
carey, alan c. (2004). galloping ghosts of the brazilian coast. lincoln, ne usa: iuniverse, inc. isbn 978-0-595-31527-7.
copeland, jack (2004). "enigma".  in copeland, b. jack. the essential turing: seminal writings in computing, logic, philosophy, artificial intelligence, and artificial life plus the secrets of enigma. isbn 978-0-19-825080-7.
costello, john; hughes, terry (1977). the battle of the atlantic. london: collins. oclc 464381083.
giorgerini, giorgio (2002). uomini sul fondo : storia del sommergibilismo italiano dalle origini a oggi [men on the bottom: the history of italian submarines from the beginning to the present] (in italian). milano: mondadori. isbn 978-88-04-50537-2.
hendrie, andrew (2006). the cinderella service: raf coastal command 1939–1945. pen & sword aviation. isbn 978-1-84415-346-6.
ireland, bernard (2003). battle of the atlantic. barnsley, uk: pen & sword books. isbn 978-1-84415-001-4.
kohnen, david (winter 2007). tombstone of victory: tracking the u-505 from german commerce raider to american war memorial, 1944–1954. the journal of america's military past. 32. pp. 5–33. oclc 40770090.
kohnen, david (1999). commanders winn and knowles: winning the u-boat war with intelligence, 1939–1943. kraków: enigma press. isbn 978-83-86110-34-6.
kohnen, david (2001). "f-21 and f-211: a fresh look into the secret room".  in bolano, randy c.; symonds, craig l. new sources in naval history: selected papers from the fourteenth naval history symposium. annapolis, md: naval institute. oclc 657999171.
levine, alan j. (1991). "was world war ii a near-run thing?".  in lee, loyd e. world war ii: crucible of the contemporary world. m. e. sharpe. isbn 978-0-87332-731-2.
lund, paul; ludlam, harry (1972). trawlers go to war. london: foulsham. isbn 978-0-450-01175-7.
maximiano, cesar campiani; neto, ricardo bonalume (2011). brazilian expeditionary force in world war ii. long island city: osprey publishing. isbn 978-1-84908-483-3.
morison, samuel eliot. (1947). history of united states naval operations in world war ii: the battle of the atlantic; september 1939 – may 1943. boston: little brown. isbn 978-0-252-06963-5. retrieved 8 november 2017.
pettibone, charles d. (2014). the organization and order of battle of militaries in wwii. ix. trafford. isbn 978-1-4907-3386-9.
rohwer, jürgen. die italienischen u-boote in der schlacht im atlantik 1940–43 [the italian submarines in the battle of the atlantic 1940–43] (in german).
roskill, s. w. (1957) [1954].  butler, j. r. m., ed. the war at sea 1939–1945: the defensive. history of the second world war united kingdom military series. i (4th impr. ed.). london: hmso. oclc 881709135. retrieved 8 november 2017.
roskill, s. w. (1961). the war at sea. iii. part 2. london: hmso. oclc 226236418.
van der vat, dan (1988). the atlantic campaign. isbn 978-0-340-37751-2.
sebag-montefiore, hugh (2004) [2000]. enigma: the battle for the code (cassell military paperbacks ed.). london: weidenfeld & nicolson. isbn 978-0-297-84251-4.
votaw, homer c. (1950–51). the brazilian navy in world war ii. us government printing office; congressional record: proceedings and debates of us congress, volume 96, part 8.senate and military review, volume xxx, number x.
welchman, gordon (1997) [1982]. the hut six story: breaking the enigma codes. cleobury mortimer, england: m&m baldwin. isbn 978-0-947712-34-1. new edition updated with an addendum consisting of a 1986 paper written by welchman that corrects his misapprehensions in the 1982 edition.
woodman, richard (2004). the real cruel sea: the merchant navy in the battle of the atlantic, 1939–1943. london. isbn 978-0-7195-6403-1.
woodman, richard (2005). the real cruel sea. john murray. isbn 978-0-7195-6599-1.

further reading[edit]
official histories

behrens, c.b.a. merchant shipping and the demands of war  london: hmso)
douglas, william a.b., roger sarty and michael whitby, no higher purpose: the official operational history of the royal canadian navy in the second world war, 1939–1943, volume 2 part 1, vanwell publishing 2002, isbn 1-55125-061-6
douglas, william a.b., roger sarty and michael whitby, a blue water navy: the official operational history of the royal canadian navy in the second world war, 1943–1945, volume 2 part 2, vanwell publishing 2007, isbn 1-55125-069-1
morison, s.e. the two ocean war and history of united states naval operation in world war ii in 15 volumes. volume i the battle of the atlantic and volume x the atlantic battle won deal with the battle of the atlantic
schull, joseph, far distant ships: an official account of canadian naval operations in world war ii, king's printer, ottawa, 1952 - reprinted by stoddart publishing, toronto, 1987, isbn 0-7737-2160-6
aircraft against u-boats (new zealand official history)

biographies

cremer, peter. u-333
dönitz, karl. ten years and twenty days
gastaldoni, ivo. a última guerra romântica: memórias de um piloto de patrulha (the last romantic war: memoirs of a maritime patrol aviator) (in portuguese) incaer, rio de janeiro (1993) isbn 8585987138
gretton, peter. convoy escort commander (london). autobiography of a former escort group commander
macintyre, donald. u-boat killer (london). autobiography of another former escort group commander  (1956)
rayner, denys, escort: the battle of the atlantic (london: william kimber 1955)
robertson, terence. the golden horseshoe (london). biography of the top german u-boat ace, otto kretschmer
robertson, terence. walker r.n. (london 1955). biography of the leading british escort group commander, frederick john walker
werner, herbert a. iron coffins: the account of a surviving u-boat captain with historical and technical details

general histories of the campaign

blair, clay. hitler's u-boat war. two volumes. isbn 0-304-35260-8 comprehensive history of the campaign
brown, ken. you-boat assault on america: the eastern seaboard campaign 1942 (us naval institute press, 2017), 288 pp
doherty, richard, 'key to victory: the maiden city in the battle of the atlantic'
fairbank, david. bitter ocean: the battle of the atlantic, 1939–1945
gannon, michael. 1990. operation drumbeat: the dramatic true story of germany's first u-boat attacks along the american coast in world war ii. harper and row. isbn 0-06-092088-2
gannon, michael. 1998. black may: the epic story of the allies' defeat of the german u-boats in may 1943. dell. isbn 0-440-23564-2
haslop, dennis. britain, germany and the battle of the atlantic: a comparative study (a&c black, 2013)
keegan, john. atlas of world war ii (2006)
macintyre, donald. the battle of the atlantic. (london 1961). excellent single volume history by one of the british escort group commanders
milner, marc. "the atlantic war, 1939–1945: the case for a new paradigm." global war studies 14.1 (2017): 45-60.
o'connor, jerome m, "fdr's undeclared war", www.historyarticles.com
rohwer, dr. jürgen. the critical convoy battles of march 1943 (london: ian allan 1977). isbn 0-7110-0749-7. a thorough and lucid analysis of the defeat of the u-boats
sarty, roger, the battle of the atlantic: the royal canadian navy's greatest campaign, 1939–1945, cef books, ottawa, 2001 isbn 1-896979-44-0
syrett, david. the defeat of the german u-boats: the battle of the atlantic (university of south carolina press, 1994.)
terraine, john, business in great waters, (london 1987) wordsworth military library. the best single-volume study of the u-boat campaigns, 1917–1945
van der vat, dan. the atlantic campaign, 1988 isbn 0-340-37751-8
williams, andrew, the battle of the atlantic: hitler's gray wolves of the sea and the allies' desperate struggle to defeat them

external links[edit]



wikimedia commons has media related to battle of the atlantic.
u-boat histories & fates 1945
the royal naval patrol service
battle of the atlantic 70th anniversary commemorations
navy department library, convoys in world war ii: world war ii commemorative bibliography no. 4, april 1993, ad-a266 529
european axis signal intelligence in world war ii as revealed by "ticom" investigations and by other prisoner of war interrogations and captured material, principally german: volume 2 — notes on german high level cryptography and cryptanalysis; see footnote 3 page 2.


links to related articles
vteu-boats
battle of the atlantic (world war i)
battle of the atlantic (world war ii)
mediterranean (world war i)
mediterranean (world war ii)
operation regenbogen
operation deadlight
u-boat lists
german
types
most successful
foreign captured
never deployed
uncompleted projects
austro-hungarian
commanders
successful
knight's cross recipients
erich raeder
karl dönitz
wolfpacks
list of wolfpacks of world war ii
blücher
borkum
dränger
eisbär
eisteufel
endrass
hai
hartmann
hecht
kiebitz
kreuzotter
leuthen
lohs
pfadfinder
pfeil
prien
raubgraf
rösing
rossbach
schill
schlieffen
seewolf
steinbrinck
siegfried
streitaxt
tümmler
vorwärts
weddigen
west
wolf
major engagements
convoy sc 7
convoy pq 17
battle of the st. lawrence
convoy ons 5
black may
bismarck chase
u-boat flotillasworld war i
i
ii
iii
iv
flanders
kurland
pola
constantinople
world war ii
regions
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
capital ships sunkworld war i
hms britannia
hms cornwallis
french battleship danton
hms formidable
gaulois
russian battleship peresvet
hms majestic
italian battleship regina margherita
hms russell
french battleship suffren
hms triumph
world war ii
hms ark royal
hms barham
hms courageous
hms eagle
hms royal oak
technology
sonar
depth charge
hedgehog
leigh light
q-ship
snorkel
elektroboot
concepts
submarine warfare
intensified submarine warfare
unrestricted submarine warfare

vteworld war ii
asia and the pacific
china
south-east asia
north and central pacific
south-west pacific
europe
western
eastern
mediterranean and middle east
north africa
east africa
italy
west africa
atlantic
north america
south america
casualties
military engagements
conferences
commanders
participantsallies.mw-parser-output .nobold{font-weight:normal}(leaders)
australia
belgium
brazil
canada
china
cuba
czechoslovakia
denmark
ethiopia
france
free france (from june 1940)
greece
india
italy (from september 1943)
luxembourg
mexico
netherlands
new zealand
norway
philippines (commonwealth)
poland
south africa
southern rhodesia
soviet union
tuva
united kingdom
united states
puerto rico
yugoslavia
axis andaxis-aligned(leaders)
albania
bulgaria
reorganized national government of the republic of china
independent state of croatia
finland
germany
hungary
free india
iraq
italy (until september 1943)
italian social republic
japan
manchukuo
philippines (second republic)
romania
slovakia
thailand
vichy france
armed neutrality
resistance
albania
austria
belgium
bulgaria
czech lands
denmark
estonia
ethiopia
france
germany
greece
hong kong
italy
japan
jewish
korea
latvia
lithuania
luxembourg
malaya
netherlands
northeast china
norway
philippines
poland
anti-communist
romania
thailand
soviet union
slovakia
western ukraine
vietnam
yugoslavia
monarchists
timelineprelude
africa
asia
europe
1939
poland
phoney war
winter war
atlantic
changsha
china
1940
weserübung
netherlands
belgium
france
armistice of 22 june 1940
britain
north africa
west africa
british somaliland
north china
baltic states
moldova
indochina
greece
compass
1941
east africa
yugoslavia
shanggao
greece
crete
iraq
soviet union (barbarossa)
finland
lithuania
syria and lebanon
kiev
iran
leningrad
gorky
moscow
sevastopol
pearl harbor
the outbreak of the pacific war
hong kong
philippines
changsha
malaya
borneo (1941–42)
1942
burma
changsha
java sea
coral sea
gazala
dutch harbor
 attu (occupation)
kiska
zhejiang-jiangxi
midway
rzhev
blue
stalingrad
singapore
dieppe
el alamein
guadalcanal
torch
1943
tunisia
kursk
smolensk
gorky
solomon islands
 attu
sicily
 cottage
lower dnieper
italy
armistice of cassibile
gilbert and marshall islands
 burma
 northern burma and western yunnan
changde
1944
monte cassino / shingle
narva
korsun–cherkassy
tempest
ichi-go
overlord (battle of normandy - d-day)
neptune
normandy
mariana and palau
bagration
western ukraine
tannenberg line
warsaw
eastern romania
belgrade
paris
dragoon
gothic line
market garden
estonia
crossbow
pointblank
lapland
hungary
leyte
ardennes
bodenplatte
philippines (1944–1945)
burma (1944–45)
1945
vistula–oder
iwo jima
western invasion of germany
okinawa
italy (spring 1945)
borneo
syrmian front
berlin
czechoslovakia
budapest
west hunan
guangxi
surrender of germany
project hula
manchuria
manila
borneo
taipei
atomic bombings
debate
kuril islands
shumshu
surrender of japan
end of world war ii in asia
aspectsgeneralfamines
bengal famine of 1943
chinese famine of 1942–43
greek famine of 1941-1944
dutch famine of 1944–45
vietnamese famine of 1945

air warfare of world war ii
blitzkrieg
comparative military ranks
cryptography
diplomacy
home front
united states
australian
united kingdom
lend-lease
manhattan project
military awards
military equipment
military production
nazi plunder
opposition
technology
allied cooperation
total war
strategic bombing
puppet states
women
art and world war ii
aftermath
expulsion of germans
operation paperclip
operation osoaviakhim
operation keelhaul
occupation of germany
territorial changes of germany
soviet occupations
romania
poland
hungary
baltic states
occupation of japan
first indochina war
indonesian national revolution
cold war
decolonization
treaty on the final settlement with respect to germany
popular culture
war crimes
allied war crimes
soviet war crimes
british war crimes
united states war crimes
german (forced labour) / wehrmacht war crimes
holocaust
aftermath
response
prosecution
italian war crimes
japanese war crimes
unit 731
prosecution
croatian war crimes
against the serbs
against the jews
romanian war crimes
wartimesexual violence
german military brothels
camp brothels
rape during the occupation of japan
sook ching
comfort women
rape of nanking
rape of manila
rape during the occupation of germany
rape during the liberation of france
rape during the soviet occupation of poland
prisoners
finnish prisoners of war in the soviet union
german prisoners of war in the soviet union
german prisoners of war in the united states
italian prisoners of war in the soviet union
japanese prisoners of war in the soviet union
japanese prisoners of war in world war ii
german mistreatment of soviet prisoners of war
polish prisoners of war in the soviet union
romanian prisoners of war in the soviet union
soviet prisoners of war in finland

bibliography
category
portal

vte united states coast guard 
 portal:united states coast guard
 category:united states coast guard
leadership
secretary of homeland security
commandant of the coast guard
vice commandant of the united states coast guard
master chief petty officer of the coast guard
organization
missions
reserve
intelligence
investigative service
legal division
police
deployable operations groupareas
districts
sectors
stations
air stations
radio stations
shipbuilding yard
national ice center
research & development center
coast guard auxiliary
personnel and training
personnel
officer ranks
enlisted rates
ratings
coast guard academy
training center cape may
training center petaluma
training center yorktown
maritime law enforcement academy
joint maritime training center
ancient order of the pterodactyl
chaplain of the coast guard
uniforms and equipment
uniforms
awards
badges
cutters
list of cutters
ship commissioning
ship decommissioning
equipment
history and traditions
history
coast guard act
coast guard city
life-saving service
revenue cutter service
lighthouse service
steamboat inspection service
bureau of navigation
"semper paratus"
flag
ensign
racing stripe
united states coast guard band
united states coast guard ceremonial honor guard
united states coast guard pipe band
fleet week
coast guard service numbers
coast guardsman's creed
united states coast guard cutters
coast guard bears
battles and operations
quasi-war
war of 1812
west indies anti-piracy operations
capture of the bravo
ingham incident
amistad incident
great lakes patrol
mexican–american war 
american civil war
battle of fort sumter
battle of pig point
battle of galveston harbor
battle of portland harbor
overland relief expedition
spanish–american war
battle of manila bay
battle of cárdenas
ice patrol
world war i
1st battle of the atlantic
great mississippi flood
rum patrol
world war ii
2nd battle of the atlantic
battle of guam
operation overlord
korean war
vietnam war
coast guard squadron one
operation market time
operation sealords
action of 1 march 1968
persian gulf war
war on terrorism
afghanistan war
iraq war
operation enduring freedom hoa

vteworld war ii
asia and the pacific
china
south-east asia
north and central pacific
south-west pacific
europe
western
eastern
mediterranean and middle east
north africa
east africa
italy
west africa
atlantic
north america
south america
casualties
military engagements
conferences
commanders
participantsallies(leaders)
australia
belgium
brazil
canada
china
cuba
czechoslovakia
denmark
ethiopia
france
free france (from june 1940)
greece
india
italy (from september 1943)
luxembourg
mexico
netherlands
new zealand
norway
philippines (commonwealth)
poland
south africa
southern rhodesia
soviet union
tuva
united kingdom
united states
puerto rico
yugoslavia
axis andaxis-aligned(leaders)
albania
bulgaria
reorganized national government of the republic of china
independent state of croatia
finland
germany
hungary
free india
iraq
italy (until september 1943)
italian social republic
japan
manchukuo
philippines (second republic)
romania
slovakia
thailand
vichy france
armed neutrality
resistance
albania
austria
belgium
bulgaria
czech lands
denmark
estonia
ethiopia
france
germany
greece
hong kong
italy
japan
jewish
korea
latvia
lithuania
luxembourg
malaya
netherlands
northeast china
norway
philippines
poland
anti-communist
romania
thailand
soviet union
slovakia
western ukraine
vietnam
yugoslavia
monarchists
timelineprelude
africa
asia
europe
1939
poland
phoney war
winter war
atlantic
changsha
china
1940
weserübung
netherlands
belgium
france
armistice of 22 june 1940
britain
north africa
west africa
british somaliland
north china
baltic states
moldova
indochina
greece
compass
1941
east africa
yugoslavia
shanggao
greece
crete
iraq
soviet union (barbarossa)
finland
lithuania
syria and lebanon
kiev
iran
leningrad
gorky
moscow
sevastopol
pearl harbor
the outbreak of the pacific war
hong kong
philippines
changsha
malaya
borneo (1941–42)
1942
burma
changsha
java sea
coral sea
gazala
dutch harbor
 attu (occupation)
kiska
zhejiang-jiangxi
midway
rzhev
blue
stalingrad
singapore
dieppe
el alamein
guadalcanal
torch
1943
tunisia
kursk
smolensk
gorky
solomon islands
 attu
sicily
 cottage
lower dnieper
italy
armistice of cassibile
gilbert and marshall islands
 burma
 northern burma and western yunnan
changde
1944
monte cassino / shingle
narva
korsun–cherkassy
tempest
ichi-go
overlord (battle of normandy - d-day)
neptune
normandy
mariana and palau
bagration
western ukraine
tannenberg line
warsaw
eastern romania
belgrade
paris
dragoon
gothic line
market garden
estonia
crossbow
pointblank
lapland
hungary
leyte
ardennes
bodenplatte
philippines (1944–1945)
burma (1944–45)
1945
vistula–oder
iwo jima
western invasion of germany
okinawa
italy (spring 1945)
borneo
syrmian front
berlin
czechoslovakia
budapest
west hunan
guangxi
surrender of germany
project hula
manchuria
manila
borneo
taipei
atomic bombings
debate
kuril islands
shumshu
surrender of japan
end of world war ii in asia
aspectsgeneralfamines
bengal famine of 1943
chinese famine of 1942–43
greek famine of 1941-1944
dutch famine of 1944–45
vietnamese famine of 1945

air warfare of world war ii
blitzkrieg
comparative military ranks
cryptography
diplomacy
home front
united states
australian
united kingdom
lend-lease
manhattan project
military awards
military equipment
military production
nazi plunder
opposition
technology
allied cooperation
total war
strategic bombing
puppet states
women
art and world war ii
aftermath
expulsion of germans
operation paperclip
operation osoaviakhim
operation keelhaul
occupation of germany
territorial changes of germany
soviet occupations
romania
poland
hungary
baltic states
occupation of japan
first indochina war
indonesian national revolution
cold war
decolonization
treaty on the final settlement with respect to germany
popular culture
war crimes
allied war crimes
soviet war crimes
british war crimes
united states war crimes
german (forced labour) / wehrmacht war crimes
holocaust
aftermath
response
prosecution
italian war crimes
japanese war crimes
unit 731
prosecution
croatian war crimes
against the serbs
against the jews
romanian war crimes
wartimesexual violence
german military brothels
camp brothels
rape during the occupation of japan
sook ching
comfort women
rape of nanking
rape of manila
rape during the occupation of germany
rape during the liberation of france
rape during the soviet occupation of poland
prisoners
finnish prisoners of war in the soviet union
german prisoners of war in the soviet union
german prisoners of war in the united states
italian prisoners of war in the soviet union
japanese prisoners of war in the soviet union
japanese prisoners of war in world war ii
german mistreatment of soviet prisoners of war
polish prisoners of war in the soviet union
romanian prisoners of war in the soviet union
soviet prisoners of war in finland

bibliography
category
portal




 
						retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=battle_of_the_atlantic&oldid=883399770"					
categories: battle of the atlanticnorth atlantic convoys of world war iiworld war ii merchant ships of the united kingdomnaval battles of world war ii involving canadanaval battles of world war ii involving francenaval battles of world war ii involving germanynaval battles of world war ii involving polandnaval battles of world war ii involving italycampaigns, operations and battles of world war ii involving the united kingdomnaval battles of world war ii involving the united statesnaval battles of world war ii involving norwayamerican theater of world war iimilitary history of the atlantic oceanbattles of world war ii involving canadamilitary history of canada during world war iihidden categories: webarchive template wayback linksengvarb from july 2018use mdy dates from june 2013wikipedia articles needing page number citations from march 2011wikipedia articles needing page number citations from december 2017articles needing additional references from july 2015all articles needing additional referencesall articles with unsourced statementsarticles with unsourced statements from january 2011articles with unsourced statements from march 2015articles with unsourced statements from february 2007wikipedia articles needing page number citations from may 2013wikipedia articles needing clarification from september 2017all articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesarticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from may 2013articles with unsourced statements from june 2014cs1 portuguese-language sources (pt)cs1 italian-language sources (it)cs1 german-language sources (de)articles with portuguese-language external links 



navigation menu


personal tools

not logged intalkcontributionscreate accountlog in 



namespaces

articletalk 




variants







views

readeditview history 



more





search



 







navigation


main pagecontentsfeatured contentcurrent eventsrandom articledonate to wikipediawikipedia store 



interaction


helpabout wikipediacommunity portalrecent changescontact page 



tools


what links hererelated changesupload filespecial pagespermanent linkpage informationwikidata itemcite this page 



print/export


create a bookdownload as pdfprintable version 



in other projects


wikimedia commons 



languages


العربيةasturianuazərbaycancaتۆرکجهбеларускаябългарскиcatalàчӑвашлаčeštinadanskdeutschελληνικάespañolesperantoفارسیfrançaisgalego한국어հայերենहिन्दीbahasa indonesiaitalianoעבריתmagyarbahasa melayunederlands日本語norskoccitanpolskiportuguêsromânăрусскийsimple englishslovenčinaslovenščinaсрпски / srpskisrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиsuomisvenskaไทยукраїнськаtiếng việt中文 
edit links 





 this page was last edited on 15 february 2019, at 05:11 (utc).
text is available under the creative commons attribution-sharealike license;
additional terms may apply.  by using this site, you agree to the terms of use and privacy policy. wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the wikimedia foundation, inc., a non-profit organization.


privacy policy
about wikipedia
disclaimers
contact wikipedia
developers
cookie statement
mobile view



 

 



(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgpageparsereport":{"limitreport":{"cputime":"2.088","walltime":"2.436","ppvisitednodes":{"value":26675,"limit":1000000},"ppgeneratednodes":{"value":0,"limit":1500000},"postexpandincludesize":{"value":528727,"limit":2097152},"templateargumentsize":{"value":104347,"limit":2097152},"expansiondepth":{"value":14,"limit":40},"expensivefunctioncount":{"value":14,"limit":500},"unstrip-depth":{"value":1,"limit":20},"unstrip-size":{"value":181909,"limit":5000000},"entityaccesscount":{"value":2,"limit":400},"timingprofile":["100.00% 1754.558      1 -total"," 18.96%  332.666     45 template:cite_book"," 17.67%  309.998      2 template:reflist"," 14.53%  254.943     86 template:ship"," 10.20%  178.978     11 template:military_navigation","  9.15%  160.605      1 template:infobox_military_conflict","  8.81%  154.523      9 template:fix","  8.01%  140.545      1 template:pt","  7.71%  135.299      1 template:link_language","  6.14%  107.788     36 template:gs"]},"scribunto":{"limitreport-timeusage":{"value":"0.852","limit":"10.000"},"limitreport-memusage":{"value":17977727,"limit":52428800}},"cachereport":{"origin":"mw1266","timestamp":"20190216120647","ttl":2073600,"transientcontent":false}}});mw.config.set({"wgbackendresponsetime":129,"wghostname":"mw1272"});});


