



south-east asian theatre of world war ii - wikipedia
document.documentelement.classname = document.documentelement.classname.replace( /(^|\s)client-nojs(\s|$)/, "$1client-js$2" );
(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgcanonicalnamespace":"","wgcanonicalspecialpagename":false,"wgnamespacenumber":0,"wgpagename":"south-east_asian_theatre_of_world_war_ii","wgtitle":"south-east asian theatre of world war ii","wgcurrevisionid":883927150,"wgrevisionid":883927150,"wgarticleid":902040,"wgisarticle":true,"wgisredirect":false,"wgaction":"view","wgusername":null,"wgusergroups":["*"],"wgcategories":["webarchive template wayback links","articles lacking in-text citations from october 2018","all articles lacking in-text citations","use british english from february 2014","use dmy dates from february 2014","articles to be expanded from june 2008","all articles to be expanded","articles using small message boxes","all articles with unsourced statements","articles with unsourced statements from september 2007","south-east asian theatre of world war ii","military history of southeast asia","pacific theatre of world war ii","1940s in southeast asia","theaters and campaigns of world war ii","indochina wars"],"wgbreakframes":false,"wgpagecontentlanguage":"en","wgpagecontentmodel":"wikitext","wgseparatortransformtable":["",""],"wgdigittransformtable":["",""],"wgdefaultdateformat":"dmy","wgmonthnames":["","january","february","march","april","may","june","july","august","september","october","november","december"],"wgmonthnamesshort":["","jan","feb","mar","apr","may","jun","jul","aug","sep","oct","nov","dec"],"wgrelevantpagename":"south-east_asian_theatre_of_world_war_ii","wgrelevantarticleid":902040,"wgrequestid":"xgq67gpaicwaaail87uaaaae","wgcspnonce":false,"wgisprobablyeditable":true,"wgrelevantpageisprobablyeditable":true,"wgrestrictionedit":[],"wgrestrictionmove":[],"wgflaggedrevsparams":{"tags":{}},"wgstablerevisionid":null,"wgcategorytreepagecategoryoptions":"{\"mode\":0,\"hideprefix\":20,\"showcount\":true,\"namespaces\":false}","wgwikieditorenabledmodules":[],"wgbetafeaturesfeatures":[],"wgmediavieweronclick":true,"wgmediaviewerenabledbydefault":true,"wgpopupsshouldsendmoduletouser":true,"wgpopupsconflictswithnavpopupgadget":false,"wgvisualeditor":{"pagelanguagecode":"en","pagelanguagedir":"ltr","pagevariantfallbacks":"en","usepageimages":true,"usepagedescriptions":true},"wgmfispagecontentmodeleditable":true,"wgmfenablefontchanger":true,"wgmfdisplaywikibasedescriptions":{"search":true,"nearby":true,"watchlist":true,"tagline":false},"wgrelatedarticles":null,"wgrelatedarticlesusecirrussearch":true,"wgrelatedarticlesonlyusecirrussearch":false,"wgwmeschemaeditattemptstepoversample":false,"wgpoweredbyhhvm":true,"wgulscurrentautonym":"english","wgnoticeproject":"wikipedia","wgcentralnoticecookiestodelete":[],"wgcentralnoticecategoriesusinglegacy":["fundraising","fundraising"],"wgwikibaseitemid":"q524272","wgscorenotelanguages":{"arabic":"العربية","catalan":"català","deutsch":"deutsch","english":"english","espanol":"español","italiano":"italiano","nederlands":"nederlands","norsk":"norsk","portugues":"português","suomi":"suomi","svenska":"svenska","vlaams":"west-vlams"},"wgscoredefaultnotelanguage":"nederlands","wgcentralauthmobiledomain":false,"wgcodemirrorenabled":true,"wgvisualeditortoolbarscrolloffset":0,"wgvisualeditorunsupportededitparams":["undo","undoafter","veswitched"],"wgeditsubmitbuttonlabelpublish":true,"oreswikiid":"enwiki","oresbaseurl":"http://ores.discovery.wmnet:8081/","oresapiversion":3});mw.loader.state({"ext.gadget.charinsert-styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site.styles":"ready","site.styles":"ready","noscript":"ready","user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site":"ready","user":"ready","user.options":"ready","user.tokens":"loading","ext.cite.styles":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.shared":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.commonprint":"ready","mediawiki.toc.styles":"ready","wikibase.client.init":"ready","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.noscript":"ready","ext.uls.interlanguage":"ready","ext.wikimediabadges":"ready","ext.3d.styles":"ready","mediawiki.skinning.interface":"ready","skins.vector.styles":"ready"});mw.loader.implement("user.tokens@0tffind",function($,jquery,require,module){/*@nomin*/mw.user.tokens.set({"edittoken":"+\\","patroltoken":"+\\","watchtoken":"+\\","csrftoken":"+\\"});
});rlpagemodules=["ext.cite.ux-enhancements","ext.scribunto.logs","site","mediawiki.page.startup","mediawiki.page.ready","mediawiki.toc","mediawiki.searchsuggest","ext.gadget.teahouse","ext.gadget.referencetooltips","ext.gadget.watchlist-notice","ext.gadget.drn-wizard","ext.gadget.charinsert","ext.gadget.reftoolbar","ext.gadget.extra-toolbar-buttons","ext.gadget.switcher","ext.centralauth.centralautologin","mmv.head","mmv.bootstrap.autostart","ext.popups","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.init","ext.visualeditor.targetloader","ext.eventlogging","ext.wikimediaevents","ext.navigationtiming","ext.uls.eventlogger","ext.uls.init","ext.uls.compactlinks","ext.uls.interface","ext.quicksurveys.init","ext.centralnotice.geoip","ext.centralnotice.startup","skins.vector.js"];mw.loader.load(rlpagemodules);});























 





south-east asian theatre of world war ii 
from wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 jump to navigation
jump to search
this article includes a list of references, but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (october 2018) (learn how and when to remove this template message)


south-east asian theatrepart of the pacific war of world war iia chindit column crosses a river in burma, 1943date8 december 1941 – 9 september 1945(3 years, 9 months and 1 day)locationburma, india, thailand, philippines, indochina, malaya, singapore, ceylon, dutch east indiesresult
allied victorybelligerents
allies
 united kingdom

 india
 burma
 malaya
 china australia united states

 philippines
 netherlands

 dutch east indies
 free france mexico free thai movement việt minh kpg
axis
 japan

 state of burma
 free india
 philippine republic
 thailand


 vichy france

 french indochinacommanders and leaders
 louis mountbatten arthur percival archibald wavell william slim chiang kai-shek wei lihuang luo zhuoying douglas macarthur joseph stilwell manuel l. quezon sergio osmeña a. t. van s. stachouwer hubertus van mook ho chi minh kim koo
 hisaichi terauchi tomoyuki yamashita hyotaro kimura masakazu kawabe shōjirō iida renya mutaguchi masaharu homma plaek phibunsongkhram j.r. seriroengrit ba maw aung san subhas chandra bose josé p. laurel


 jean decouxvtecampaigns of world war iieurope
poland
phoney war
winter war
denmark & norway
france & benelux
britain
balkans
eastern front
finland
western front (1944–45)
pacific war

china
pacific ocean
south-east asia
south west pacific
japan
manchuria (1945)
mediterranean and middle east

north africa
horn of africa
mediterranean sea
adriatic
malta
yugoslavia
iraq
syria–lebanon
iran
italy
dodecanese
southern france
other campaigns

atlantic
arctic
strategic bombing
america
french west africa
madagascar
contemporaneous wars

soviet–japanese border conflicts
franco-thai war
ecuadorian–peruvian war
ili rebellionvtesouth-east asian theater
malaya and singapore
invasion
singapore (1941)
operation krohcol
sinking of prince of wales and repulse
jitra
gurun
kampar
slim river
gemas
muar
parit sulong massacre
endau
singapore (1942)

thailand
franco-thai war
invasion

french indochina
franco-thai war
invasion
coup de main
august revolution

indian ocean
27 february 1941
8 may 1941
sydney vs kormoran
japanese raiders
andaman and nicobar
homfreyganj massacre
christmas island
1st indian ocean
easter sunday raid
madagascar
cocos islands mutiny
réunion
13 november 1943
11 january 1944
14 february 1944
2nd indian ocean
17 july 1944

burma, india, and china
japanese conquest of burma
bilin river
sittang bridge
pegu
taukkyan
yunnan-burma road
toungoo
shwedaung
prome
yenangyaung
burma campaign 1942–1943
first arakan
the hump
chindits
burma campaign 1944
u go
ngakyedauk
chindits (ii)
sangshak
imphal
kohima
tennis court
burma campaign 1944–1945
north burma & yunnan
meiktila & mandalay
pakokku
hill 170
ramree island
dracula
elephant point
sittang bend

the south-east asian theatre of world war ii was the name given to the campaigns of the pacific war in burma, ceylon, india, thailand, the philippines, indochina, malaya and singapore. conflict in this theatre began when the empire of japan invaded french indochina in september 1940 and rose to a new level following the raid on pearl harbor, and simultaneous attacks on hong kong, the philippines, thailand, singapore and malaya on 7 and 8 december 1941. the main landing at singora (now songkhla) on the east side of the isthmus of kra preceded the bombing of pearl harbor by several hours. action in the theatre officially ended on 9 september 1945.

contents

1 initial japanese successes

1.1 malaya and singapore
1.2 the japanese indian ocean raid
1.3 japanese occupation of the andaman and nicobar islands


2 burma campaign

2.1 us forces in the china burma india theatre


3 air war in south east asia
4 indian ocean naval campaigns 1942–45
5 command structures

5.1 allied command structure

5.1.1 11th army group


5.2 japanese command structure


6 see also
7 notes
8 references
9 external links


initial japanese successes[edit]
the allies suffered many defeats in the first half of the war. two major british warships, hms repulse and hms prince of wales were sunk by a japanese air attack off malaya on 10 december 1941. following the invasion, the government of thailand formally allied itself with japan on 21 december. japan invaded hong kong in the battle of hong kong on 8 december, culminating in surrender on 25 december. january saw the invasions of burma and the dutch east indies and the capture of manila and kuala lumpur.

malaya and singapore[edit]
japanese forces met stiff resistance from iii corps of the indian army, the australian 8th division and british units during the battle of malaya, but japan's superiority in air power, tanks and infantry tactics drove the allied units back. after being driven out of malaya by the end of january 1942, allied forces in singapore, under the command of lieutenant general arthur percival, surrendered to the japanese on 15 february 1942; about 130,000 allied troops became prisoners of war. the fall of singapore was the largest surrender in british military history.

the japanese indian ocean raid[edit]
the japanese indian ocean raid was a naval sortie by the fast carrier strike force of the imperial japanese navy from 31 march to 10 april 1942 against allied shipping and bases in the indian ocean. following the destruction of the abdacom forces in the battles around java in february and march, the japanese sortied into the indian ocean to destroy british seapower there and support the invasion of burma. the raid was only partially successful. it did not succeed in destroying allied naval power in the indian ocean but it did force the british fleet to relocate from british ceylon to kilindini near mombasa in kenya, as their more forward fleet anchorages could not be adequately protected from japanese attack. the fleet in the indian ocean was then gradually reduced to little more than a convoy escort force as other commitments called for the more powerful ships. from may 1942, it was also used in the invasion of madagascar — an operation aimed at thwarting any attempt by japan to use bases on the vichy french controlled territory.
in 1942, madras city was attacked by a mitsubishi rufe, (the zero's seaplane version) operating from the carrier ryūjō which dropped a single bomb near the st. george fort.[1][2] the physical damage was negligible,[3] though the public response was major and the city was evacuated because of fears of subsequent japanese bombing and invasion. many rich families from madras moved permanently to the hill stations in fear.[4]
also in 1942[5] in preparation for a possible japanese invasion of india, the british began improvements to the kodaikanal-munnar road to facilitate its use as an evacuation route from kodaikanal along the southern crest of the palani hills to top station. existing roads then continued to munnar and down to cochin where british ships would be available for evacuation out of india.[6][7]

japanese occupation of the andaman and nicobar islands[edit]
main article: invasion and occupation of the andaman islands during world war ii
the andaman and nicobar islands (8,293 km² on 139 islands) are a group of islands situated in the bay of bengal at about 780 miles from kolkata (known at the time as calcutta), 740 miles from chennai (known at the time as madras) and 120 miles from cape nargis in burma. on 23 march 1942 a japanese invasion force seized the islands and occupied them until the end of the war.
on 29 december 1943, political control of the islands was theoretically passed to the azad hind government of subhas chandra bose. bose visited port blair to raise the tricolour flag of the indian national army. after bose's departure the japanese remained in effective control of the andamans, and the sovereignty of the arzi hukumat-e hind was largely fictional.[8] the islands themselves were renamed "shaheed" and "swaraj", meaning "martyr" and "self-rule" respectively. bose placed the islands under the governorship of lt col. a. d. loganathan, and had limited involvement with the administration of the territory.

burma campaign[edit]
main article: burma campaign
the retreat of burcorps
the formation of the british fourteenth army (the "forgotten army")
the arakan campaign
the japanese attack on india
the allied counter offensives
road to rangoon
brigadier orde wingate and the chindits
this section needs expansion. you can help by adding to it. (june 2008)
us forces in the china burma india theatre[edit]
main article: china burma india theater of world war ii
northern combat area command (ncac)
flying tigers
fourteenth air force
tenth air force
twentieth air force (operation matterhorn)
the allied logistical airlift from india into china over the hump
the ledo road
merrill's marauders
one of the major logistical efforts of the war was "flying the hump" over the himalayas and the building of the ledo road from india to china as a replacement for the burma road.

this section needs expansion. you can help by adding to it. (june 2008)
air war in south east asia[edit]
raf far east air force
raf third tactical air force
bombing of south-east asia (1944–45)
raf battle honours:

ceylon 1942
qualification: for operations against japanese aircraft and naval units by squadrons based in ceylon during the japanese attacks of april 1942.

burma 1944–1945
qualification: for operations during the 14th army's advance from imphal to rangoon, the coastal amphibious assaults, and the battle of pegu yomas, august 1944 to august 1945.

indian ocean naval campaigns 1942–45[edit]
main article: indian ocean in world war ii
the earliest successes were gained by mine laying and submarine warfare. the japanese minesweeping capability was never great, and when confronted with new types of mines they did not adapt quickly. japanese shipping was driven from the burmese coast using this type of warfare. british submarines based in british ceylon operated against japanese shipping.
it was only after the war in europe was clearly coming to an end that large british forces were dispatched to the indian ocean again. following the neutralisation of the german fleet in late 1943 and early 1944, forces from the home fleet were released, and the success of operation overlord in june meant even more craft could be sent, including precious amphibious assault shipping.
during late 1944, as more british aircraft carriers came into the area a series of strikes were flown against oil targets in sumatra, such as operation meridian. uss saratoga was lent for the first attack by the united states. the oil installations were heavily damaged by the attacks, aggravating the japanese fuel shortages due to the american blockade. the final attack was flown as the carriers were heading for sydney to become the british pacific fleet.
after the departure of the main battle forces the indian ocean was left with escort carriers and older battleships as the mainstay of its naval forces. nevertheless, during those months important operations were launched in the recapture of burma, including landings on ramree and akyab and near rangoon.

command structures[edit]
allied command structure[edit]
at the start of the war the british had two commands with responsibilities for possessions in the theatre. india command under general sir archibald wavell the commander-in-chief (cinc) of the army of india and the far east command, first under air chief marshal robert brooke-popham and then from 23 december 1941 commanded by lieutenant-general sir henry royds pownall.
india command was responsible for british india, british ceylon, and for some of the time burma. the far east command based in singapore was responsible for hong kong, malaya, singapore and other british far east possessions including, for some of the time, burma.
a month after the outbreak of war with japan on 7 december 1941, the allied governments jointly appointed the british commander-in-chief (cinc) of the army of india, general sir archibald wavell, as supreme allied commander of all "american-british-dutch-australian" (abda) forces in south east asia and the pacific, from burma to the dutch east indies.
however, advances made by the japanese over the next month split the abda forces in two. after transferring the forces in burma to the india command, on 25 february 1942 wavell resigned as commander of the abda and resumed his position of cinc of the army of india. responsibility for the south west pacific area passed to us general douglas macarthur as supreme allied commander south west pacific.
from february 1942 until november 1943 the india command was responsible for the south east asian theatre. general wavell was made viceroy of india and general claude auchinleck became commander-in-chief of the india command on 20 june 1943. in august 1943 the allies formed a new south east asian command to take over strategic responsibilities for the theatre.
the reorganisation of the theatre command took about two months. on 4 october winston churchill appointed admiral lord louis mountbatten supreme allied commander of the south east asia command (seac). the american general joseph stilwell was the first deputy supreme allied commander. on 15 november, auchinleck handed over responsibility for the conduct of operations against the japanese in the theatre to mountbatten.
the initial land forces operational area for seac included india, burma, british ceylon and malaya. operations were also mounted in japanese-occupied sumatra, thailand and french indochina (vietnam, cambodia, and laos).
initially seac commanded:

british eastern fleet (based in ceylon)
british 11th army group (commonwealth land forces; hq in new delhi)
air hq india (new delhi)
china burma india theater (cbi), (all us forces in theatre; hq in new delhi).
in october 1944, cbi was split into us forces china theater (usfct) and india-burma theater (usfibt).
on 12 november 1944 eleventh army group redesignated by allied land forces south east asia (alfsea) combining commonwealth and us forces,[citation needed] with an hq at kandy. on 1 december alfsea hq moved to barrackpore, india.
on 15 august 1945 responsibility for the rest of the dutch east indies was transferred from the south west pacific area to seac.
seac was disbanded on 30 november 1946.

11th army group[edit]
british 11th army group ( november 1943 – 12 november 1944) was on paper the main commonwealth army force in south east asia which directed

british fourteenth army
british army in ceylon (ceylon army)
northern combat area command under the command of joseph stilwell.
on 12 november 1944 the 11th army group was redesignated allied land forces south east asia, still under seac, because it was felt that an inter-allied command was better than the purely british headquarters. command problems with general stilwell and his interactions with the u.s. joint chiefs of staff had precipitated the change.

japanese command structure[edit]
the imperial japanese army unit controlling all army land and air units in south east asia and the south west pacific was the southern expeditionary army headquartered in saigon, indochina. it was commanded by general count hisaichi terauchi, who commanded it from 1941 to 1945. the japanese also deployed the south seas force, a combined force of army and special naval landing force personnel. the southern army's major field commands were the 14th army, the 15th army, the 16th army and the 25th army. these consisted of 11 infantry divisions, six independent infantry brigades, and six tank regiments, plus artillery and support troops. the japanese extensively used bicycle infantry, which allowed them quick movement over vast distances.

see also[edit]
british indian army
indian national army
burma national army
thai phayap army
military history of britain during world war ii#the far east
pacific war
pacific theater of operations
second sino-japanese war
kantogun
notes[edit]


^ world war 2 plus 55 archived 10 march 2012 at the wayback machine. usswashington.com. retrieved on 2013-09-18.

^ chennai daily photo: forgotten escape. chennaimadras.blogspot.in (2010-03-04). retrieved on 2013-09-18.

^ randorguy (27 august 2009). "crime-writer's case-book: vizianagaram raja's case". gallata community. retrieved 2009-09-28..mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/65/lock-green.svg/9px-lock-green.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d6/lock-gray-alt-2.svg/9px-lock-gray-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/aa/lock-red-alt-2.svg/9px-lock-red-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration{color:#555}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration span{border-bottom:1px dotted;cursor:help}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/wikisource-logo.svg/12px-wikisource-logo.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output code.cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:inherit;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#33aa33;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-right{padding-right:0.2em}

^ bayly, christopher alan; harper, timothy norman (2004). "1942-debacle in burma". forgotten armies: the fall of british asia, 1941–1945. penguin books ltd. p. 192. isbn 0-674-01748-x.

^ mcmanis, douglas r. (1972). european impressions of the new england coast. 139–141. p. 134.

^ basu, soma (17 september 2005). "on the escape route". metro plus chennai. the hindu. retrieved 2009-09-10.

^ g.venkataraman, radio sai, volume 4 – issue 07, kodai, some history and geography (july 2006)

^ c. a. bayly & t. harper forgotten armies. the fall of british asia 1941-5 (london) 2004 p325


references[edit]
.mw-parser-output .refbegin{font-size:90%;margin-bottom:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indents>ul{list-style-type:none;margin-left:0}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indents>ul>li,.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indents>dl>dd{margin-left:0;padding-left:3.2em;text-indent:-3.2em;list-style:none}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-100{font-size:100%}
bayly, christopher; harper, tim (2007). forgotten wars: freedom and revolution in southeast asia. belknap press. isbn 0-674-02153-3.
bayly, christopher; harper, tim (2005). forgotten armies: the fall of british asia, 1941–1945. belknap press.
drea, edward j. (1998). in the service of the emperor:  essays on the imperial japanese army. nebraska: university of nebraska press. isbn 0-8032-1708-0.
jon latimer, burma: the forgotten war, london: john murray, 2004. isbn 978-0-7195-6576-2 * william slim, defeat into victory, london: cassell, 1956.
seki, eiji. (2006). mrs. ferguson's tea-set, japan and the second world war: the global consequences following germany's sinking of the ss automedon in 1940. london: global oriental. isbn 978-1-905246-28-1 (cloth) [reprinted by university of hawaii press, honolulu, 2007 – previously announced as sinking of the ss automedon and the role of the japanese navy: a new interpretation.]
william slim, defeat into victory, london: cassell, 1956.

external links[edit]
parliamentary debates, "house of commons official report, jan. 27, 1942". on the far eastern theatre and a.b.d.a
strategic planning for coalition warfare 1941–1942: chapter vi: army deployment and the war against japan december 1941 – march 1942
australian war memorial: remembering 1942 the fall of singapore, 15 february 1942
national army museum
bbc article on the burma campaign
forgotten warriors: china-burma-india
vteindian national armyhistorical
revolutionary conspiracy of wwi
rash behari
har dayal
ghadr
chatto
berlin committee
bagha jatin
barkatullah
kabul mission
provisional government of india
imperial japan
pan asianism
greater east asia
more
indian independenceleague (iil)
pritam singh
swami satyananda puri
indian national council
i fujiwara
f kikan
k.p.k. menon
a.m. sahay
s.a. ayer
rash behari bose
bidadary resolutions
tokyo conference
h iwakuro
i kikan
bangkok conference
azad hind
hikari kikan
azad hind dal
more
subhas chandra bose
indian national congress
c.r. das
sarat bose
purna swaraj
bengal volunteers
emilie schenkl
forward bloc
indian legion
u-180
azad hind
habib-ur-rahman
death controversy
more
indian nationalarmy
battle of malaya
mohan singh
fall of singapore
farrer park
first ina
first arakan offensive
hindustan field force
jiffs
azad brigade
gandhi brigade
nehru brigade
subhas brigade
bahadur group
tokyo boys
rani of jhansi regiment
andaman and nicobar islands
m.z. kiani
lakshmi sahgal
a.d. loganathan
j.r. bhonsle
janaki davar
rasammah bhupalan
shaukat malik
john thivy
battles
burma theatre
ha-go
u-go
battle of imphal
battle of kohima
battle of irrawaddy
battle of meiktila
surrender of japan
controversies
more
red fort trials
csdic
dhillon
sahgal
shah nawaz
burhan-ud-din
ina defence committee
kailash nath katju
asaf ali
tej bahadur sapru
bhulabhai desai
jawaharlal nehru
bombay mutiny
more
related topics
azad hind radio
battaglione azad hindoustan
special bureau for india
azad hind decorations
selarang barracks incident
japanese occupation of burma
burma area army
masakasu kawabe
india in world war ii
14th army
william slim
malaysian indian congress
ina treasure
peter fay
joyce lebra
hugh toye
more
 indian independence movement portal
vteworld war ii
asia and the pacific
china
south-east asia
north and central pacific
south-west pacific
europe
western
eastern
mediterranean and middle east
north africa
east africa
italy
west africa
atlantic
north america
south america
casualties
military engagements
conferences
commanders
participantsallies.mw-parser-output .nobold{font-weight:normal}(leaders)
australia
belgium
brazil
canada
china
cuba
czechoslovakia
denmark
ethiopia
france
free france (from june 1940)
greece
india
italy (from september 1943)
luxembourg
mexico
netherlands
new zealand
norway
philippines (commonwealth)
poland
south africa
southern rhodesia
soviet union
tuva
united kingdom
united states
puerto rico
yugoslavia
axis andaxis-aligned(leaders)
albania
bulgaria
reorganized national government of the republic of china
independent state of croatia
finland
germany
hungary
free india
iraq
italy (until september 1943)
italian social republic
japan
manchukuo
philippines (second republic)
romania
slovakia
thailand
vichy france
armed neutrality
resistance
albania
austria
belgium
bulgaria
czech lands
denmark
estonia
ethiopia
france
germany
greece
hong kong
italy
japan
jewish
korea
latvia
lithuania
luxembourg
malaya
netherlands
northeast china
norway
philippines
poland
anti-communist
romania
thailand
soviet union
slovakia
western ukraine
vietnam
yugoslavia
monarchists
timelineprelude
africa
asia
europe
1939
poland
phoney war
winter war
atlantic
changsha
china
1940
weserübung
netherlands
belgium
france
armistice of 22 june 1940
britain
north africa
west africa
british somaliland
north china
baltic states
moldova
indochina
greece
compass
1941
east africa
yugoslavia
shanggao
greece
crete
iraq
soviet union (barbarossa)
finland
lithuania
syria and lebanon
kiev
iran
leningrad
gorky
moscow
sevastopol
pearl harbor
the outbreak of the pacific war
hong kong
philippines
changsha
malaya
borneo (1941–42)
1942
burma
changsha
java sea
coral sea
gazala
dutch harbor
 attu (occupation)
kiska
zhejiang-jiangxi
midway
rzhev
blue
stalingrad
singapore
dieppe
el alamein
guadalcanal
torch
1943
tunisia
kursk
smolensk
gorky
solomon islands
 attu
sicily
 cottage
lower dnieper
italy
armistice of cassibile
gilbert and marshall islands
 burma
 northern burma and western yunnan
changde
1944
monte cassino / shingle
narva
korsun–cherkassy
tempest
ichi-go
overlord (battle of normandy - d-day)
neptune
normandy
mariana and palau
bagration
western ukraine
tannenberg line
warsaw
eastern romania
belgrade
paris
dragoon
gothic line
market garden
estonia
crossbow
pointblank
lapland
hungary
leyte
ardennes
bodenplatte
philippines (1944–1945)
burma (1944–45)
1945
vistula–oder
iwo jima
western invasion of germany
okinawa
italy (spring 1945)
borneo
syrmian front
berlin
czechoslovakia
budapest
west hunan
guangxi
surrender of germany
project hula
manchuria
manila
borneo
taipei
atomic bombings
debate
kuril islands
shumshu
surrender of japan
end of world war ii in asia
aspectsgeneralfamines
bengal famine of 1943
chinese famine of 1942–43
greek famine of 1941-1944
dutch famine of 1944–45
vietnamese famine of 1945

air warfare of world war ii
blitzkrieg
comparative military ranks
cryptography
diplomacy
home front
united states
australian
united kingdom
lend-lease
manhattan project
military awards
military equipment
military production
nazi plunder
opposition
technology
allied cooperation
total war
strategic bombing
puppet states
women
art and world war ii
aftermath
expulsion of germans
operation paperclip
operation osoaviakhim
operation keelhaul
occupation of germany
territorial changes of germany
soviet occupations
romania
poland
hungary
baltic states
occupation of japan
first indochina war
indonesian national revolution
cold war
decolonization
treaty on the final settlement with respect to germany
popular culture
war crimes
allied war crimes
soviet war crimes
british war crimes
united states war crimes
german (forced labour) / wehrmacht war crimes
holocaust
aftermath
response
prosecution
italian war crimes
japanese war crimes
unit 731
prosecution
croatian war crimes
against the serbs
against the jews
romanian war crimes
wartimesexual violence
german military brothels
camp brothels
rape during the occupation of japan
sook ching
comfort women
rape of nanking
rape of manila
rape during the occupation of germany
rape during the liberation of france
rape during the soviet occupation of poland
prisoners
finnish prisoners of war in the soviet union
german prisoners of war in the soviet union
german prisoners of war in the united states
italian prisoners of war in the soviet union
japanese prisoners of war in the soviet union
japanese prisoners of war in world war ii
german mistreatment of soviet prisoners of war
polish prisoners of war in the soviet union
romanian prisoners of war in the soviet union
soviet prisoners of war in finland

bibliography
category
portal




 
						retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=south-east_asian_theatre_of_world_war_ii&oldid=883927150"					
categories: south-east asian theatre of world war iimilitary history of southeast asiapacific theatre of world war ii1940s in southeast asiatheaters and campaigns of world war iiindochina warshidden categories: webarchive template wayback linksarticles lacking in-text citations from october 2018all articles lacking in-text citationsuse british english from february 2014use dmy dates from february 2014articles to be expanded from june 2008all articles to be expandedarticles using small message boxesall articles with unsourced statementsarticles with unsourced statements from september 2007 



navigation menu


personal tools

not logged intalkcontributionscreate accountlog in 



namespaces

articletalk 




variants







views

readeditview history 



more





search



 







navigation


main pagecontentsfeatured contentcurrent eventsrandom articledonate to wikipediawikipedia store 



interaction


helpabout wikipediacommunity portalrecent changescontact page 



tools


what links hererelated changesupload filespecial pagespermanent linkpage informationwikidata itemcite this page 



print/export


create a bookdownload as pdfprintable version 



languages


العربيةasturianucatalàčeštinaespañol한국어bahasa indonesiaitalianoעבריתമലയാളംbahasa melayuportuguêsрусскийslovenčinatiếng việt中文 
edit links 





 this page was last edited on 18 february 2019, at 14:01 (utc).
text is available under the creative commons attribution-sharealike license;
additional terms may apply.  by using this site, you agree to the terms of use and privacy policy. wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the wikimedia foundation, inc., a non-profit organization.


privacy policy
about wikipedia
disclaimers
contact wikipedia
developers
cookie statement
mobile view



 

 



(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgpageparsereport":{"limitreport":{"cputime":"0.656","walltime":"0.889","ppvisitednodes":{"value":7033,"limit":1000000},"ppgeneratednodes":{"value":0,"limit":1500000},"postexpandincludesize":{"value":264316,"limit":2097152},"templateargumentsize":{"value":15991,"limit":2097152},"expansiondepth":{"value":12,"limit":40},"expensivefunctioncount":{"value":6,"limit":500},"unstrip-depth":{"value":1,"limit":20},"unstrip-size":{"value":24895,"limit":5000000},"entityaccesscount":{"value":0,"limit":400},"timingprofile":["100.00%  603.210      1 -total"," 32.23%  194.417      1 template:infobox_military_conflict"," 17.80%  107.381      1 template:reflist"," 16.77%  101.161     44 template:flagicon"," 12.18%   73.491      7 template:military_navigation"," 11.42%   68.865      1 template:cite_web"," 10.54%   63.571      1 template:more_footnotes","  7.58%   45.728      3 template:ambox","  6.26%   37.747      2 template:isbn","  5.97%   36.024      1 template:world_war_ii"]},"scribunto":{"limitreport-timeusage":{"value":"0.178","limit":"10.000"},"limitreport-memusage":{"value":5992557,"limit":52428800},"limitreport-logs":"table#1 {\n  [\"size\"] = \"tiny\",\n}\n"},"cachereport":{"origin":"mw1317","timestamp":"20190218140051","ttl":2073600,"transientcontent":false}}});mw.config.set({"wgbackendresponsetime":110,"wghostname":"mw1323"});});


