



law enforcement in italy - wikipedia
document.documentelement.classname = document.documentelement.classname.replace( /(^|\s)client-nojs(\s|$)/, "$1client-js$2" );
(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgcanonicalnamespace":"","wgcanonicalspecialpagename":false,"wgnamespacenumber":0,"wgpagename":"law_enforcement_in_italy","wgtitle":"law enforcement in italy","wgcurrevisionid":883461105,"wgrevisionid":883461105,"wgarticleid":1977376,"wgisarticle":true,"wgisredirect":false,"wgaction":"view","wgusername":null,"wgusergroups":["*"],"wgcategories":["webarchive template wayback links","wikipedia articles needing copy edit from december 2018","all articles needing copy edit","articles containing explicitly cited english-language text","articles with italian-language external links","law enforcement in italy"],"wgbreakframes":false,"wgpagecontentlanguage":"en","wgpagecontentmodel":"wikitext","wgseparatortransformtable":["",""],"wgdigittransformtable":["",""],"wgdefaultdateformat":"dmy","wgmonthnames":["","january","february","march","april","may","june","july","august","september","october","november","december"],"wgmonthnamesshort":["","jan","feb","mar","apr","may","jun","jul","aug","sep","oct","nov","dec"],"wgrelevantpagename":"law_enforcement_in_italy","wgrelevantarticleid":1977376,"wgrequestid":"xgwevwpaadkaajpvkuuaaaay","wgcspnonce":false,"wgisprobablyeditable":true,"wgrelevantpageisprobablyeditable":true,"wgrestrictionedit":[],"wgrestrictionmove":[],"wgflaggedrevsparams":{"tags":{}},"wgstablerevisionid":null,"wgcategorytreepagecategoryoptions":"{\"mode\":0,\"hideprefix\":20,\"showcount\":true,\"namespaces\":false}","wgwikieditorenabledmodules":[],"wgbetafeaturesfeatures":[],"wgmediavieweronclick":true,"wgmediaviewerenabledbydefault":true,"wgpopupsshouldsendmoduletouser":true,"wgpopupsconflictswithnavpopupgadget":false,"wgvisualeditor":{"pagelanguagecode":"en","pagelanguagedir":"ltr","pagevariantfallbacks":"en","usepageimages":true,"usepagedescriptions":true},"wgmfispagecontentmodeleditable":true,"wgmfenablefontchanger":true,"wgmfdisplaywikibasedescriptions":{"search":true,"nearby":true,"watchlist":true,"tagline":false},"wgrelatedarticles":null,"wgrelatedarticlesusecirrussearch":true,"wgrelatedarticlesonlyusecirrussearch":false,"wgwmeschemaeditattemptstepoversample":false,"wgpoweredbyhhvm":true,"wgulscurrentautonym":"english","wgnoticeproject":"wikipedia","wgcentralnoticecookiestodelete":[],"wgcentralnoticecategoriesusinglegacy":["fundraising","fundraising"],"wgwikibaseitemid":"q1969510","wgscorenotelanguages":{"arabic":"العربية","catalan":"català","deutsch":"deutsch","english":"english","espanol":"español","italiano":"italiano","nederlands":"nederlands","norsk":"norsk","portugues":"português","suomi":"suomi","svenska":"svenska","vlaams":"west-vlams"},"wgscoredefaultnotelanguage":"nederlands","wgcentralauthmobiledomain":false,"wgcodemirrorenabled":true,"wgvisualeditortoolbarscrolloffset":0,"wgvisualeditorunsupportededitparams":["undo","undoafter","veswitched"],"wgeditsubmitbuttonlabelpublish":true,"oreswikiid":"enwiki","oresbaseurl":"http://ores.discovery.wmnet:8081/","oresapiversion":3});mw.loader.state({"ext.gadget.charinsert-styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site.styles":"ready","site.styles":"ready","noscript":"ready","user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site":"ready","user":"ready","user.options":"ready","user.tokens":"loading","ext.cite.styles":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.shared":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.commonprint":"ready","mediawiki.toc.styles":"ready","wikibase.client.init":"ready","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.noscript":"ready","ext.uls.interlanguage":"ready","ext.wikimediabadges":"ready","ext.3d.styles":"ready","mediawiki.skinning.interface":"ready","skins.vector.styles":"ready"});mw.loader.implement("user.tokens@0tffind",function($,jquery,require,module){/*@nomin*/mw.user.tokens.set({"edittoken":"+\\","patroltoken":"+\\","watchtoken":"+\\","csrftoken":"+\\"});
});rlpagemodules=["ext.cite.ux-enhancements","ext.scribunto.logs","site","mediawiki.page.startup","mediawiki.page.ready","mediawiki.toc","mediawiki.searchsuggest","ext.gadget.teahouse","ext.gadget.referencetooltips","ext.gadget.watchlist-notice","ext.gadget.drn-wizard","ext.gadget.charinsert","ext.gadget.reftoolbar","ext.gadget.extra-toolbar-buttons","ext.gadget.switcher","ext.centralauth.centralautologin","mmv.head","mmv.bootstrap.autostart","ext.popups","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.init","ext.visualeditor.targetloader","ext.eventlogging","ext.wikimediaevents","ext.navigationtiming","ext.uls.eventlogger","ext.uls.init","ext.uls.compactlinks","ext.uls.interface","ext.quicksurveys.init","ext.centralnotice.geoip","ext.centralnotice.startup","skins.vector.js"];mw.loader.load(rlpagemodules);});























 





law enforcement in italy 
from wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 jump to navigation
jump to search
this article may require copy editing for grammar, style, cohesion, tone, or spelling. you can assist by editing it. (december 2018) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
law enforcement in italy is an exclusive duty of the state and it is generally provided by four national agencies with full powers, with other local forces providing restricted or limited duties. 

 carabinieri.
contents

1 overview
2 structure

2.1 national police forces

2.1.1 polizia di stato
2.1.2 guardia di finanza
2.1.3 arma dei carabinieri
2.1.4 polizia penitenziaria
2.1.5 corpo forestale dello stato
2.1.6 interforces


2.2 local police forces
2.3 regional police

2.3.1 provincial police
2.3.2 municipal police


2.4 historical


3 transportation
4 see also
5 references
6 external links


overview[edit]
law enforcement in italy is an exclusive function of the state and it is organised, under the ministry of domestic affairs, with provincial division and jurisdiction. 
the ministero dell'interno ministry of the interior is the government department with oversight of all of the national forces. on a local level, the forces are under the authority of the prefetto, in collaboration with the questore (the local chief of the polizia), that have their offences prefettura and questura in every province capital. 
for this reasons, the main police force in italy is polizia di stato, or simply polizia,which is a nationwide, full-powered agency, with different divisions for each specialised area of interest. polizia’s duties may vary from traffic patrol to investigation, forensic analysis or riot control. this civilian agency is generally distributed from the medium-large cities up to the province capital, even though exceptions may exist with offices and/or stations in critical towns or in places of interest.
same duties are carried out also by arma dei carabinieri, commonly known as ‘’carabinieri’’, which are also military police for the italian armed forces. in addition to this, generally carabinieri are also in charge of investigation or intervention inside public administrations and personal right violation, but mainly because of their history as “defender of the constitution (it is not by chance that the president of republic safety corps is a special section of carabinieri called corazzieri). they act under the orders of the questore (even thought this position is the chief of the polizia and a civilian) and usually they are distributed all over the country, with a station approximately in every municipality (or at least every range of 5km).
even though in cases of emergency both polizia or carabinieri may be called upon or may intervene, strong differences underline the two agencies: carabinieri is more an investigation/law break control corps, while polizia also includes a number of bureaucratic duties around visas, passports, licences, registration of tourists from hotels, and so on. 
other national forces generally focus on specific and distinguished duties. for example, guardia di finanza is the finance and economy police (or roughly customs, excise and fraud squad), while ‘’polizia penitenziaria’’ is the national prison guard agency.  only in 2016 the environment and the forestry police guard, called the "corpo forestale dello stato,"  was absorbed into the carabinieri, taking the number of national police forces from five to four. 
italy divides law enforcement into military and civil forces, distinguishing each "agency" by duties and jurisdictions. all law enforcement officers are considered "pubblici ufficiali" [public functionaries] and but not all officers belonging to police forces are "agenti di pubblica sicurezza" [public safety officers] as the latter gives the authority to arrest, investigate and patrol in the whole national territory and in all situations.
in a different way from other countries (such as the united states), italy does not have multiple specialised agencies for immigration, drug offenses, patrolling etc, but each “area” is investigated by a dedicated section of each national agency. for example, the polizia stradale [highway patrol] is a role within the polizia, with focus on patrolling the roads and various crimes committed on national and local roads. therefore, crimes covering multiple "areas" do not need to be covered by multiple agencies.

border and maritime patrolling is undertaken by the guardia costiera [coast guard]. officers, who are members of the italian navy, do not have the same range of powers as the polizia or the carabinieri.
municipal officers work on minor crimes on a local basis, from traffic offenses to small-time drug dealing and illegal camping. each town or city has its own police department but they have limited jurisdiction and duties. local officers can check driving licenses, enforce municipal laws and ordinances and carry out investigations for robberies and minor offenses, but they cannot form a "riot squad" or interfere with homicide or general investigations by the police or carabinieri.
each polizia locale is under the authority of the respective local mayor, but the officers' mandate is valid only during their working hours and within the area their force covers, whereas carabinieri, polizia di stato and guardia di finanza are always formally "on duty", wherever they are and regardless of whether they are at work.
in 2005, the total number of active police officers in all of the agencies was 324,339 in italy, the highest number in the european union both overall and per capita, twice the number of agents in the similarly sized united kingdom.[1] however, this number includes every officer of the arma dei carabinieri, one of the four arms of the italian armed forces, which includes roles which in other countries would not necessarily be considered to be police officers. for example, it has a department akin to workplace inspectors, carabinieri della tutela del lavoro, and one tasked with ensuring proper standards are being met within food and drink production, carabinieri per la tutela della salute.

structure[edit]
national police forces[edit]
polizia di stato[edit]
main article: polizia di stato
the polizia di stato (state police) is the civil national police of italy. along with patrolling, investigative and law enforcement duties, it patrols the autostrada (italy's express highway network), and oversees the security of railways, bridges and waterways.
it is a civilian police force, while the carabinieri and the guardia di finanza are military. while its internal organization and mindset is somewhat military, its personnel is composed of civilians. its headquarters are in rome, and there are regional and provincial divisions throughout italian territory.
a program  polizia di quartiere (quarter police) has been implemented which increases police presence and deters crime. pairs of poliziotti (policemen) or carabinieri patrol areas of major cities on foot.

guardia di finanza[edit]
main article: guardia di finanza
the guardia di finanza, (english: financial guard) is a military corps under the authority of the minister of economy and finance, with a role as a police force.
the corps is in charge of financial, economic, judiciary and public safety: tax evasion, financial crimes, smuggling, money laundering, international illegal drug trafficking, illegal immigration, customs and borders checks, copyright violations, anti-mafia operations, credit card fraud, cybercrime, counterfeiting, terrorist financing, maintaining public order, and safety, political and military defense of the italian borders.
the guardia di finanza has a strength of around 68,000 soldiers working as agents, ncos and officers. its militaries are in service in the europol and the european anti-fraud office. its latin motto since 1933 is nec recisa recedit (english: not even broken retreats). the guardia di finanza also maintains over 600 boats and ships and more than 100 aircraft to fulfill its mission of patrolling italy's territorial waters.
during demonstrations and very big events, the guardia di finanza is often called on duty as riot police.

arma dei carabinieri[edit]
main article: arma dei carabinieri
 carabinieri in piazza san marco, venice, 1924.
the carabinieri is the common name for the arma dei carabinieri, a gendarmerie-like military corps with police duties. they also serve as the military police for the italian armed forces.
the carabinieri have become a separate armed force (alongside the army, navy and air force), thus ending their long-standing tradition as the first corps (arma) of the italian army (esercito). they are referred to as the arma or la benemerita (the meritorious corps).
carabinieri units have been dispatched all over the world in peacekeeping missions, including bosnia, kosovo, afghanistan and iraq.
in november 2003, twelve carabinieri were killed in a suicide bomb attack on their base in nasiriyah, in southern iraq. this was italy's largest military loss in a single action since world war ii.
until 2001,[2] only men were allowed to become part of the arma (or any military force, for that matter), but military reforms allow women to serve in the italian military, including carabinieri.
having both military police duties and civil police duties, the arma is usually called on duty as riot police during big events and demonstrations.

polizia penitenziaria[edit]
main article: polizia penitenziaria
the polizia penitenziaria (prison guards, literally penitentiary police) operate the italian prison system and handle the transportation of inmates. the training academies for the polizia penitenziaria are located in aversa, monastir, cairo montenotte, castiglione delle stiviere, parma, portici, rome, san pietro clarenza, verbania and sulmona.
its agents are sometimes called to help the other police forces during big events.

corpo forestale dello stato[edit]
main article: corpo forestale dello stato
the corpo forestale dello stato (national forestry department, now dissolved) was responsible for law enforcement in italian national parks and forests. their duties included enforcing poaching laws, safeguarding protected animal species and preventing forest fires.
founded in 1822, the corpo forestale dello stato was a civilian police force specialised on the environmental protection. a recent law reform expanded its duties to food controls.[3]
in italy it had the responsibility to manage the activities related to the cites (convention on international trade in endangered species).
the autonomous region of sardinia has its own corp of forestry police.[4]
corpo forestale dello stato was dissolved on december 31, 2016 and all personnel become militarized and absorbed into the carabinieri's comando unità per la tutela forestale, ambientale e agroalimentare.

interforces[edit]
the direzione investigativa antimafia (or dia) (anti-mafia investigation directorate) is a joint organization of polizia di stato, carabinieri, corpo forestale dello stato and guardia di finanza for the fight against organized crime. 
founded in 1991, under the authority of the minister of interior as the direzione nazionale antimafia (national anti-mafia directorate). its operations include preemptive investigations, judicial investigations, and international relations, and it investigates characteristics, objectives, and methods of the mafia as well as their domestic and international contacts. the dia was to prevent mafiosi from infiltrating the government.[5]
the direzione centrale per i servizi antidroga (central directorate for anti-drug services) is a joint organization of polizia di stato, carabinieri and guardia di finanza for the fight against drug trafficking. founded in 1976 as direzione anti droga (anti-drug directorate), is under the authority of the criminal police department of the minister of interior.

local police forces[edit]
regional police[edit]
the polizia regionale (regional police) is a local police only used in some of the 20 regions of italy. their main tasks are to enforce regional and national hunting and fishing laws, but have also expanded in wildlife management and environmental protection. they can also act as local police in communes who desire their own police but are too small to maintain their own force.

provincial police[edit]
the polizia provinciale (provincial police) is a local police only used in some of the 109 provinces of italy. their main tasks are to enforce regional and national hunting and fishing laws, but have also expanded in wildlife management and environmental protection. carries traffic police service and participates in the security services arranged by the authorities.

municipal police[edit]
in addition, each comune has its own polizia municipale (municipal police) whose main duty is to enforce local regulations and traffic laws; it also deals with petty crimes but in larger cities they cooperate with the national police forces to prevent and repress major crimes. depending on their location they are also called polizia municipale, polizia locale, polizia comunale, polizia urbana  or vigili urbani.
in some regions polizia provinciale and polizia municipale are grouped together under the name polizia locale (local police), although they keep their own internal organisation. small communes can merge their local police forces in a consortium.
both provincial and municipal forces are reliant on the state police for scientific support and other forms of assistance.

historical[edit]
the organizzazione di vigilanza repressione dell'antifascismo (or ovra) (english: organization for vigilance in repression of anti-fascism) was a secret police organization in italy during fascism.
the polizia dell'africa italiana or pai (police of italian africa) (1936–1944).
the guardia nazionale repubblicana or gnr (national republic guard) was a paramilitary force of the italian social republic created by decree on december 8, 1943, replacing the carabinieri and the mvsn.
zaptié were locally raised gendarmerie units in the italian colonies of tripolitania, cyrenaica, colonia primigenia and somalia between 1889 and 1942.
zaptié were used during the period of trust territory of somaliland from 1950 to 1960. members were sent to italy to train and after 1960 the merged into the somali police force.

transportation[edit]
 a lamborghini gallardo of the polizia di stato, used for emergency intervention and transport of organs, parked in piazza dell'unità d'italia in trieste
 state police fiat grande punto
 an alfa romeo 159 parked at the seafront in bari
until recently, all italian police forces were equipped with italian-made police cars, with fiat and alfa romeos most common. the most famous of them, the alfa romeo giulia, gave the nicknames of the cars still commonly used today. a patrol car belonging to polizia is nicknamed pantera (panther), one used by the carabinieri is nicknamed gazzella (gazelle) and every unmarked car is called a civetta (owl).
every force has helicopters, trucks and campers (used as mobile offices, usually in undercover missions).
in venice, which is built across several islands linked by bridges and surrounded by water, public security and fire brigades work with boats.


in 2004, lamborghini donated two lamborghini gallardo police cars to the polizia di stato on their 152nd anniversary. on the 31st november 2009 one of these supercars was badly damaged in a collision near the northern italian town of cremona where it was on display at a student jobs fair. the car apparently swerved to avoid another vehicle crossing its path and collided with two stationary vehicles; it was repaired in january 2010.

arma dei carabinieri patrol vehicles are very dark blue with a red stripe along the side. most if not all have white roofs. their telephone number is also featured - "112" (whilst that of the polizia di stato is "113"). their vehicles have registration plates beginning with "cc".[6] precedently, carabinieri cars was dark green: the last green (and the first black) carabinieri car was the alfa romeo giulia.
guardia di finanza vehicles are dove grey or dark blue with a thin gold stripe along each side and the words guardia di finanza in gold underneath. the vehicle plates begin with the letters “gdif” in red.[7]
polizia di stato vehicles are light blue with a white stripe along the side and the word polizia in large letters underneath. the license plates start with the word polizia in red usually followed by a letter and four numbers.[8] like the carabinieri veichles, the cars was precedently green, but before the green colour, the cars was red.
polizia penitenziaria vehicles are dark blue with a light blue stripe along the side and polizia penitenziaria in white letters under the stripe. license plates have the entire name polizia penitenziaria on them, followed by three numbers and two letters.[9]
corpo forestale dello stato vehicles are green with a white stripe and the words corpo forestale dello stato in white along the side. the vehicle plates begin with the letters “cfs” in red.[10] from january 2017 all vehicles have been transferred under the  carabinieri's comando unità per la tutela forestale, ambientale e agroalimentare. the words "corpo forestale dello stato" has been replaced with "carabinieri", but they still remain green with a white stripe.
polizia provinciale vehicles are white with a green horizontal stripe along the side.
polizia municipale the colours of vehicles depend on regional laws. usually the cars are white with blue, green or red stripes and the words "polizia municipale" or "polizia locale" along the side, in some regions car color can be black or dark grey. license plates have the entire name polizia locale on them and the letter "y" followed by another letter, three numbers and two letters.

see also[edit]
crime in italy
references[edit]


^ crime and criminal justice - issue number 19/2008 (ks-sf-08-019) archived 2011-08-12 at the wayback machine

^ 
   camera.it, web:
   http://www.camera.it/parlam/leggi/deleghe/01215dl.htm

^ http://www3.corpoforestale.it/flex/cm/pages/serveblob.php/l/it/idpagina/317

^ http://www.sardegnaambiente.it/corpoforestale/

^ jamieson, alison. the antimafia. great britain: antony rowe ltd., 2000. print

^ [1]

^ [2]

^ [3]

^ [4]

^ [5]


external links[edit]



wikimedia commons has media related to italian police.
(in italian) polizia di stato (official website) (english; francais; espanol; deutsch)
vtelaw enforcement in italypolizia di stato
nucleo operativo centrale di sicurezza (nocs)
divisione investigazioni generali e operazioni speciali (digos)
polizia ferroviaria
polizia stradale
polizia postale
mobile squads
arma dei carabinieri
raggruppamento operativo speciale (ros)
gruppo di intervento speciale (gis)
corazzieri
1st carabinieri mobile brigade
2nd carabinieri mobile brigade
forestry carabinieri
guardia di finanza
antiterrorismo pronto impiego (atpi)
gruppo di investigazione criminalità organizzata (gico)
others
guardia costiera
polizia penitenziaria
polizia provinciale
polizia municipale
vigili del fuoco

vteitaly articleshistorychronology
prehistory
italic peoples
ancient peoples of italy
pre-nuragic sardinia
nuragic peoples
etruscan civilization
nuragic civilization
phoenician/carthaginian colonies
magna graecia
ancient rome
kingdom
republic
empire
middle ages
italy under odoacer
ostrogoths
byzantium
lombards
the holy roman empire
the sardinian judicates
arabs
normans
guelphs and ghibellines
the italian city-states
the maritime republics
renaissance
italian wars
early modern period
unification
revolutions of 1820
revolutions of 1830
revolutions of 1848
sicilian revolution of 1848
first war of independence
crimean war
second war of independence
expedition of the thousand
third war of independence
capture of rome
monarchy and the world wars
kingdom of italy
colonial empire
world war i
fascist italy
world war ii
resistance
civil war
republic
economic boom
years of lead
years of mud
mani pulite
by topic
citizenship
currency
economy
fashion
flags
genetic
historic states
military
music
postal
railways
geography
peninsula
northern
northwest
northeast
central
southern
south
insular
climate
fauna
flora
mountains
prealps
alps
apennines
volcanology
volcanoes
beaches
canals
caves
earthquakes
islands
lakes
national parks
rivers
valleys
politics
constitution
elections
referendums
foreign relations
missions
judiciary
law enforcement
military
parliament
chamber of deputies
senate
political parties
president
prime minister
council of ministers
regions
provinces
metropolitan cities
comune
municipalities
cities
economy
economic history
milan
naples
rome
turin
regions by gdp
automotive industry
banking
central bank
companies
energy
government debt
science and technology
stock exchange
taxation
telecommunications
internet
tourism
trade unions
transportation
welfare
society
abortion
adoption
billionaires
capital punishment
corruption
crime
demographics
education
secondary
higher
universities
emigration
fathers' rights movement
feminism
gambling
health
healthcare
immigration
lgbt rights
nobility
prostitution
racism
religion
smoking
social class
terrorism
women
culture
duecento
trecento
quattrocento
cinquecento
seicento
settecento
architecture
art
castles
cinema
cuisine
beer
wine
cultural icons
decorations
design
fashion
festivals
folklore
italian language
regional italian
italian literature
italophilia
italophobia
languages
media
newspapers
radio
tv
monuments
music
classical
folk
opera
popular
mythology
national symbols
anthem
emblem
flag
regions
national monument
personification
people
philosophy
public holidays
festa della repubblica
sculpture
sport
traditions
world heritage sites

 italy portal
 category
 commons
 news
quotes
travel
 wikiproject

vtelaw enforcement in europe sovereign states
albania
andorra
armenia
austria
azerbaijan
belarus
belgium
bosnia and herzegovina
bulgaria
croatia
cyprus
czech republic
denmark
estonia
finland
france
georgia
germany
greece
hungary
iceland
ireland

italy
kazakhstan
latvia
liechtenstein
lithuania
luxembourg
macedonia
malta
moldova
monaco
montenegro
netherlands
norway
poland
portugal
romania
russia
san marino
serbia
slovakia
slovenia
spain
sweden
switzerland
turkey
ukraine
united kingdom
vatican city
states with limitedrecognition
abkhazia
artsakh
kosovo
northern cyprus
south ossetia
transnistria
dependencies andother entities
åland
faroe islands
gibraltar
guernsey
isle of man
jersey
svalbard
other entities
european union




 
						retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=law_enforcement_in_italy&oldid=883461105"					
categories: law enforcement in italyhidden categories: webarchive template wayback linkswikipedia articles needing copy edit from december 2018all articles needing copy editarticles containing explicitly cited english-language textarticles with italian-language external links 



navigation menu


personal tools

not logged intalkcontributionscreate accountlog in 



namespaces

articletalk 




variants







views

readeditview history 



more





search



 







navigation


main pagecontentsfeatured contentcurrent eventsrandom articledonate to wikipediawikipedia store 



interaction


helpabout wikipediacommunity portalrecent changescontact page 



tools


what links hererelated changesupload filespecial pagespermanent linkpage informationwikidata itemcite this page 



print/export


create a bookdownload as pdfprintable version 



in other projects


wikimedia commons 



languages


العربيةdeutschitalianoעברית日本語norskpolski 
edit links 





 this page was last edited on 15 february 2019, at 15:11 (utc).
text is available under the creative commons attribution-sharealike license;
additional terms may apply.  by using this site, you agree to the terms of use and privacy policy. wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the wikimedia foundation, inc., a non-profit organization.


privacy policy
about wikipedia
disclaimers
contact wikipedia
developers
cookie statement
mobile view



 

 



(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgpageparsereport":{"limitreport":{"cputime":"0.596","walltime":"0.774","ppvisitednodes":{"value":12168,"limit":1000000},"ppgeneratednodes":{"value":0,"limit":1500000},"postexpandincludesize":{"value":133114,"limit":2097152},"templateargumentsize":{"value":26579,"limit":2097152},"expansiondepth":{"value":13,"limit":40},"expensivefunctioncount":{"value":24,"limit":500},"unstrip-depth":{"value":0,"limit":20},"unstrip-size":{"value":3917,"limit":5000000},"entityaccesscount":{"value":0,"limit":400},"timingprofile":["100.00%  589.352      1 -total"," 45.50%  268.151      8 template:navbox"," 29.00%  170.930      1 template:europe_topic"," 24.29%  143.181      2 template:lang-en"," 23.53%  138.646     49 template:iso2country"," 15.67%   92.357      1 template:italy_topics"," 15.05%   88.724      1 template:country_topics"," 12.05%   70.988      1 template:copyedit","  8.25%   48.622      1 template:ambox","  8.00%   47.123     49 template:iso2country/data"]},"scribunto":{"limitreport-timeusage":{"value":"0.222","limit":"10.000"},"limitreport-memusage":{"value":13865345,"limit":52428800},"limitreport-logs":"table#1 {\n  [\"size\"] = \"tiny\",\n}\n"},"cachereport":{"origin":"mw1243","timestamp":"20190219150825","ttl":2073600,"transientcontent":false}}});mw.config.set({"wgbackendresponsetime":99,"wghostname":"mw1262"});});


