



italian parliament - wikipedia
document.documentelement.classname = document.documentelement.classname.replace( /(^|\s)client-nojs(\s|$)/, "$1client-js$2" );
(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgcanonicalnamespace":"","wgcanonicalspecialpagename":false,"wgnamespacenumber":0,"wgpagename":"italian_parliament","wgtitle":"italian parliament","wgcurrevisionid":883172661,"wgrevisionid":883172661,"wgarticleid":1417859,"wgisarticle":true,"wgisredirect":false,"wgaction":"view","wgusername":null,"wgusergroups":["*"],"wgcategories":["articles with italian-language external links","articles containing italian-language text","cs1 maint: archived copy as title","wikipedia articles in need of updating from december 2017","all wikipedia articles in need of updating","pages using deprecated image syntax","wikipedia articles in need of updating from september 2018","pages using bar box without float left or float right","commons category link is on wikidata","italian parliament","parliaments by country","1861 establishments in italy","bicameral legislatures","national legislatures","italian constitutional institutions"],"wgbreakframes":false,"wgpagecontentlanguage":"en","wgpagecontentmodel":"wikitext","wgseparatortransformtable":["",""],"wgdigittransformtable":["",""],"wgdefaultdateformat":"dmy","wgmonthnames":["","january","february","march","april","may","june","july","august","september","october","november","december"],"wgmonthnamesshort":["","jan","feb","mar","apr","may","jun","jul","aug","sep","oct","nov","dec"],"wgrelevantpagename":"italian_parliament","wgrelevantarticleid":1417859,"wgrequestid":"xgwyogpamfeaadgjaxaaaabq","wgcspnonce":false,"wgisprobablyeditable":true,"wgrelevantpageisprobablyeditable":true,"wgrestrictionedit":[],"wgrestrictionmove":[],"wgflaggedrevsparams":{"tags":{}},"wgstablerevisionid":null,"wgcategorytreepagecategoryoptions":"{\"mode\":0,\"hideprefix\":20,\"showcount\":true,\"namespaces\":false}","wgwikieditorenabledmodules":[],"wgbetafeaturesfeatures":[],"wgmediavieweronclick":true,"wgmediaviewerenabledbydefault":true,"wgpopupsshouldsendmoduletouser":true,"wgpopupsconflictswithnavpopupgadget":false,"wgvisualeditor":{"pagelanguagecode":"en","pagelanguagedir":"ltr","pagevariantfallbacks":"en","usepageimages":true,"usepagedescriptions":true},"wgmfispagecontentmodeleditable":true,"wgmfenablefontchanger":true,"wgmfdisplaywikibasedescriptions":{"search":true,"nearby":true,"watchlist":true,"tagline":false},"wgrelatedarticles":null,"wgrelatedarticlesusecirrussearch":true,"wgrelatedarticlesonlyusecirrussearch":false,"wgwmeschemaeditattemptstepoversample":false,"wgpoweredbyhhvm":true,"wgulscurrentautonym":"english","wgnoticeproject":"wikipedia","wgcentralnoticecookiestodelete":[],"wgcentralnoticecategoriesusinglegacy":["fundraising","fundraising"],"wgwikibaseitemid":"q1117578","wgscorenotelanguages":{"arabic":"العربية","catalan":"català","deutsch":"deutsch","english":"english","espanol":"español","italiano":"italiano","nederlands":"nederlands","norsk":"norsk","portugues":"português","suomi":"suomi","svenska":"svenska","vlaams":"west-vlams"},"wgscoredefaultnotelanguage":"nederlands","wgcentralauthmobiledomain":false,"wgcodemirrorenabled":true,"wgvisualeditortoolbarscrolloffset":0,"wgvisualeditorunsupportededitparams":["undo","undoafter","veswitched"],"wgeditsubmitbuttonlabelpublish":true,"oreswikiid":"enwiki","oresbaseurl":"http://ores.discovery.wmnet:8081/","oresapiversion":3});mw.loader.state({"ext.gadget.charinsert-styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site.styles":"ready","site.styles":"ready","noscript":"ready","user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site":"ready","user":"ready","user.options":"ready","user.tokens":"loading","ext.cite.styles":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.shared":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.commonprint":"ready","mediawiki.toc.styles":"ready","wikibase.client.init":"ready","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.noscript":"ready","ext.uls.interlanguage":"ready","ext.wikimediabadges":"ready","ext.3d.styles":"ready","mediawiki.skinning.interface":"ready","skins.vector.styles":"ready"});mw.loader.implement("user.tokens@0tffind",function($,jquery,require,module){/*@nomin*/mw.user.tokens.set({"edittoken":"+\\","patroltoken":"+\\","watchtoken":"+\\","csrftoken":"+\\"});
});rlpagemodules=["ext.cite.ux-enhancements","ext.scribunto.logs","site","mediawiki.page.startup","mediawiki.page.ready","mediawiki.toc","mediawiki.searchsuggest","ext.gadget.teahouse","ext.gadget.referencetooltips","ext.gadget.watchlist-notice","ext.gadget.drn-wizard","ext.gadget.charinsert","ext.gadget.reftoolbar","ext.gadget.extra-toolbar-buttons","ext.gadget.switcher","ext.centralauth.centralautologin","mmv.head","mmv.bootstrap.autostart","ext.popups","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.init","ext.visualeditor.targetloader","ext.eventlogging","ext.wikimediaevents","ext.navigationtiming","ext.uls.eventlogger","ext.uls.init","ext.uls.compactlinks","ext.uls.interface","ext.quicksurveys.init","ext.centralnotice.geoip","ext.centralnotice.startup","skins.vector.js"];mw.loader.load(rlpagemodules);});























 





italian parliament 
from wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 jump to navigation
jump to search
parts of this article (those related to electoral system) need to be updated. in particular: the section should be updated with the electoral system approved in 2017. please update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (december 2017)
parliament of the republic parlamento della repubblicaemblems of the senate and the chamber of deputiestypetypebicameral housessenate  chamber of deputiesleadershippresident of the senatemaria elisabetta alberti casellati (forza italia) since 2018 president of the chamber of deputiesroberto fico (m5s) since 2018 structureseats951321 senators (315 elected + 6 for life)630 deputiessenate political groups
list
 government (165)
     m5s (107)
     lega (58)
supported by (6)
     mixed group[1] (6)
opposition (147)
     fi (61)
     pd (52)
     fdi (18)
     autonomies (8)
     mixed group (8)
chamber of deputies political groups
list
 government (343)
     m5s (220)
     lega (123)
supported by (6)
     mixed group (6)
     maie (6)
opposition (279)
     pd (112)
     fi (105)
     fdi (32)
     leu (14)
     mixed group (15)
     cp-ins. (4)
     svp-patt (4)
     nci-usei (4)
     +e (3)
     vacant (2)
electionssenate last election4 march 2018chamber of deputies last election4 march 2018senate next electionno later than 2023chamber of deputies next electionno later than 2023meeting placesenate: palazzo madamachamber of deputies: palazzo montecitoriowebsitewww.parlamento.it
italian republic
this article is part of a series on thepolitics and government ofitaly
constitution
head of state
president (list)
sergio mattarella

executive
prime minister (list)
giuseppe conte
council of ministers
current cabinet

legislature
parliament (list)
senate of the republic
chamber of deputies

judiciary
constitutional court
supreme court of cassation
court of assizes
council of state
code of criminal procedure


administrative divisions
regions

politics of aosta valley
piedmont
lombardy
veneto
trentino-south tyrol
friuli-venezia giulia
emilia-romagna
liguria
tuscany
umbria
marche
molise
lazio
abruzzo
campania
apulia
calabria
sicily
sardinia

provinces
municipalities

electionsreferendums
political parties
democratic party
five star movement
forza italia
recent general elections
2006200820132018
recent referendums
december 2016 (constitution)
april 2016 (oil drilling)
2011 (multiple issues)
2009 (electoral law)
2006 (constitution)
2005 (fertility law)
constituencies

foreign relations
related topics
taxation
gazzetta ufficiale(government journal)



other countries
atlas
vte
the italian parliament (italian: parlamento italiano) is the national parliament of the italian republic. the parliament is the representative body of italian citizens and is the successor to the parliament of the kingdom of sardinia (1848–1861) and the parliament of the kingdom of italy (1861–1946). it is a bicameral legislature with 945 elected members and a small number of unelected members (parlamentari). it is composed of the chamber of deputies, with 630 members (deputati) elected on a national basis,[2] and the senate of the republic, with 315 members (senatori) elected on a regional basis, plus a small number (currently 6) of senators for life (senatori a vita), either appointed or ex officio.[3] the two houses are independent from one another and never meet jointly except under circumstances specified by the constitution.
by the republican constitution of 1948, the two houses of the italian parliament possess the same powers: this particular form of parliamentary democracy (so-called perfect bicameralism) has been coded in the current form since the adoption of the albertine statute and resurged after the dismissal of the fascist dictatorship of the 1920s and 1930s during world war ii.
because the president of the senate is acting head of state in the absence of the president of the republic, the president of the senate and the vice-presidents of the senate have a higher position than their respective counterparts of the chamber of deputies in the italian order of precedence.[4] on the other hand, no distinction is made between deputies and senators.

contents

1 composition of the parliament
2 functions of the parliament

2.1 legislating
2.2 amendments to the constitution and to constitutional laws
2.3 reviewing and guiding the executive
2.4 inquests
2.5 joint sessions


3 prerogatives

3.1 autodichia
3.2 parliamentary immunity


4 electoral system

4.1 election of the senate
4.2 election of the chamber of deputies
4.3 overseas constituencies


5 membership

5.1 senate of the republic
5.2 chamber of deputies


6 see also
7 notes
8 references
9 further reading
10 external links


composition of the parliament[edit]
the chamber of deputies has 630 elected members, while the senate has 315 elected members. the number of deputies and senators was fixed by a constitutional amendment in 1963: in its original text, the constitution provided for a variable number of members of parliament depending on the population.[5] the senate of the republic also includes, in addition to the elected senators, a small number of unelected members (senators for life). there are two categories of senators for life. former presidents of the republic are senators for life by law, unless they renounce this privilege. furthermore, the president of the republic can appoint up to five italian citizens as senators for life "for outstanding merits in the social, scientific, artistic or literary field".[6]
different voting ages are mandated for each house: any italian citizen who is 18 or older can vote in the election of the chamber of deputies,[7] while the voting age for the senate of the republic is 25.[8] similarly, the two houses have a different age of candidacy: deputies are required to be 25 or older,[7] while elected senators must be 40 or older.[8] no explicit age limit is required to be appointed senator for life (but presidents of the republic must be 50 or older).[9]

functions of the parliament[edit]
the main prerogative of the parliament is the exercise of legislative power, that is the power to enact laws. for a bill to become law, it must receive the support of both houses independently in the same text. a bill is first introduced in one of the houses, amended, and then approved or rejected: if approved, it is passed to the other house, which can amend it before approving or rejecting it. if approved without amendments, the bill is then promulgated by the president of the republic and becomes law. if approved with amendments, it is goes back to the other house. the process continues until the bill is approved in the same text by both houses (in which case it becomes law after promulgation) or is rejected by one house.
the council of ministers, which is led by the prime minister and is the national executive of italy, needs to have the confidence of both houses.[10] it must receive a vote of confidence by both houses before being officially in power, and the parliament can cast a motion of no confidence at any moment, which forces the prime minister and their cabinet to resign. if the president of the republic is unable to find a new prime minister able to receive the support of both houses, he or she can dissolve one or both houses and new elections are held.

legislating[edit]
the process by which the italian parliament makes law, the iter legis, is as follows:

proposal → inspection → review → approval (article by article and final) → promulgation → publication.
proposals can be made by the government, individual members of parliament (who must present their proposal to the chamber that they are a member of), private citizens (who must present a proposal in the form of a draft law, approved by 50,000 voters), individual regional councils, and the national council for economics and labour (cnel).
once a proposal is introduced in one of the two chambers, it is assigned to a parliamentary committee to carry out preliminary inspection of the proposal (taking advantage of advice of other committees, especially, the so-called "filter committees"). at this point, two different procedures can be taken.
in the "normal procedure", the committee holds a referral meeting, drafts a response and names a spokesperson to report this response, then leaves the responsibility for composing and approving the bill's text to the assembly. this must be completed in no more than four months for the chamber of deputies and two months for the senate. 
once the bill has come before one of the chambers, a general discussion takes place, followed by the review (with a vote) article by article, and finally a vote on the whole bill, which is normally an open ballot (secret ballots are possible for matters of individual conscience). if the bill passes the vote in one chamber then it passes to the other chamber of the parliament, where it must be voted through without any further changes. if the other chamber does make any modifications to the bill then the new version of the bill must be returned to the first chamber to approve these changes. if the bill repeats this process many times it is said to be "shuttling" or "dribbling." this procedure is obligatory for bills which concern constitutional and electoral matters, the delegation of legislative power, the authorisation of the ratification of international treaties, the approval of the budget.[11]
in all other cases, the "special procedure" (also called the "decentralised legislative procedure") can be employed. in this case, the committee holds a drafting meeting (leaving only the final approval of the bill to the parliament), or a deliberative/legislative meeting (in which case the entire legislative process is carried out by the committee and the bill is not voted on by parliament at all). this procedure can be vetoed by the vote of one tenth of the members of the chamber in which the bill was originally proposed, by a vote of one fifth of the members of the committee, or by the decision of the government.
there are special procedures for the passage of laws granting emergency powers, the annual law incorporating eu law, annual financial laws (such as the budget), and the passage of laws under urgency.[12]
once the bill has been approved in the same form by both houses of parliament, it is sent to the president of the republic, who must promulgate it within one month or send it back to parliament for renewed debate with a written justification. if after the renewed debate the bill is approved by parliament again, the president of the republic is constitutionally required to promulgate it. once it has been promulgated, the law is published in the official gazette by the ministry of justice and enters into force after the vacatio legis (15 days unless otherwise specified).

amendments to the constitution and to constitutional laws[edit]
main article: constitutional laws of italy
the rigidity of the constitution is ensured by the special procedure required to amend it. with the same procedure, parliament can adopt a constitutional law, which is a law with the same strength as the constitution.
article 138 of the constitution provides for the special procedure through which the parliament can adopt constitutional laws (including laws to amend the constitution), which is a variation of the ordinary legislative procedure.[13] the ordinary procedure to adopt a law in italy requires both houses of parliament to approve the law in the same text, with a simple majority (i.e. the majority of votes cast). constitutional laws start by following the same procedure. however, after having been approved for the first time, they need to be voted for by both houses a second time, which can happen no sooner than three months after the first. in this second reading, no new amendments to the bill may be proposed: the bill must be either approved or rejected in its entirety.
the constitutional law needs to be approved by at least a majority of mps in each house (absolute majority) in its second reading. depending on the results of this second vote, the constitutional law may then follow two different paths.

if the bill is approved by a qualified majority of two-thirds of members in each house, it can be immediately promulgated by the president of the republic and become law.
if the bill is approved by a majority of members in each house, but not enough to reach the qualified majority of two-thirds, it does not immediately become law. instead, it must first be published in the official gazette (the official journal where all italian laws are published). within three months after its publication, a constitutional referendum may be requested by either 500,000 voters, five regional councils, or one-fifth of the members of a house of parliament. if no constitutional referendum has been requested after the three months have elapsed, the bill can be promulgated and becomes law.
reviewing and guiding the executive[edit]
in addition to its legislative functions, the parliament also reviews the actions of the government and provides it with political direction.
parliament exercises its review function by means of questions and inquests. questions consist of a written question directed to the government, asking whether a certain claim is true, whether the government is aware of it, and whether the government is taking any action about it. the response can be given by the relevant government minister, by the chairperson of the relevant ministry, or by an undersecretary. it may be given in writing or delivered to the parliament orally. the member who asked the question can respond to say whether or not the answer is satisfactory. in injunctions, a fact is noted with a request for the reasons for the conduct of the government and its future intentions. the process is done by writing. if the member who filed the injunction is not satisfied with the response, they can present a motion to hold a debate in the parliament.
the provision of political direction embodies the relationship of trust which is meant to exist between parliament and the government. it takes the form of confidence votes and votes of no confidence. these can be held concerning the entire government or an individual minister. other means of providing political direction include motions, resolutions, and day-orders giving instruction to the government.

inquests[edit]
under article 82 of the constitution, "each chamber can undertake inquests into matters of public interest. for this purpose, they should appoint a committee formed so that it conforms to the proportions of the various parliamentary groups." in order to fulfill its function as the ordinary organ through which popular sovereignty is exercised, parliament can employ the same investigative and coercive instruments as the judiciary in these inquests.

joint sessions[edit]
 the italian parliament in joint session for the election of president sergio mattarella (3 february 2015)
the parliament meets and votes in joint session (italian: camere in seduta comune) for a set of functions explicitly established by the constitution. article 55.2 specifies that these functions are entrenched and cannot be altered.
joint sessions take place in the building of the chamber of deputies at palazzo montecitorio and are presided over by the president of the chamber of deputies ex officio.[14] in this way, the drafters of the constitution intended to establish an equilibrium with the power of the president of the senate to exercise the functions of the president of the republic when the latter is indisposed.
joint sessions take place for the following matters explicitly established by the constitution:[15]

to elect the president of the republic (in this case, 58 regional delegates are added to the assembly). for the first three votes, a two-thirds majority is required to elect the president. if these fail, subsequent votes only require a simple majority.[16]
to receive the president of the republic's oath of office on election.[17]
to vote on the impeachment of the president of the republic[18] (an accusation of "high treason or attack to the constitution"; this has never happened). this only requires a simple majority.
to elect one third of the elected members of the high council of the judiciary.[19] for the first two votes, election requires a three-fifths majority of the delegates; subsequent votes require a three-fifths majority of voting members (i.e. excluding abstentions).[20]
to elect five of the fifteen judges of the constitutional court.[21] the first three votes require a two-thirds majority; subsequent votes require only a three-fifths majority.[22]
to vote on the list of 45 citizens from which sixteen lay members of the constitutional court are to be drawn in case of impeachment against the president of the republic.[21] the same voting system is used as for the election of the judges of the consititutional court.
there is debate among legal scholars about whether the parliament in joint session can make its own standing orders. most scholars think it can, by analogy with the regulation of the senate in article 65, which explicitly foresees such action.[23]

prerogatives[edit]
the chambers of the italian parliament enjoy special prerogatives to guarantee their autonomy with respect to other parts of government:

regulatory autonomy: the chambers regulate and approve the regulations which govern their internal affairs autonomously.
financial autonomy: the chambers decide autonomously the amount of resources they require for carrying out their functions. the court of audit has no jurisdiction over this.[24]
administrative autonomy: each chamber is in charge of the organisation of its own administrative facilities and the employment of its own officials (exclusively through a national public competition).
inviolability of the site: law enforcement officials can enter the parliament buildings only with the permission of the members of the respective chambers and they may not be armed.
autodichia[edit]
in some matters (e.g. employment disputes) the italian parliament acts as its own judicial authority (without using external courts), which is referred to as "autodichia" (self-judging).[25] in order no. 137 of 2015 of the italian constitutional court,[26] which agreed to rehear the appeal in the lorenzoni case,[27] which had been dismissed the year before, it was stated that autodichia might be found in violation of the independence of the judiciary.

parliamentary immunity[edit]
the constitution defines "parliamentary status" in articles 66, 67, 68 and 69.
article 67 ("prohibition on imperative mandate) states that "every member of parliament represents the nation and performs their functions without limitation by a mandate." the members are considered to receive a general mandate from the whole electorate, which cannot be revoked by the initiative of the individual electoral district which elected them, nor by their political party. this general mandate is not subject to judicial review, only political review through constitutionally defined methods (mainly elections and referenda).
article 68 lays down the principles of immunity (insindacabilità) and inviolability (inviolabilità), stating that "the members of parliament cannot be called to account for the opinions they express or the votes that they cast in the exercise of their functions" and that "without the permission of the chamber to which they belong, no member of parliament can be subjected to a body search or a search of their home, nor can they be arrested or otherwise stripped of their personal freedom, or imprisoned, except in the execution of a final court judgement or if caught in the act of a crime for which it is compulsory to arrest someone caught in the act. an analogous standard is required in order to put members of parliament under any form of surveillance." neither immunity nor inviolability are prerogatives of individual parliamentarians; they are intended to protect the free exercise of parliament's functions against judicial interference, which occurred in earlier regimes when the judiciary was under government control and was not autonomous. 
there is controversy with respect to the principle of immunity about what statements are expressed in the member's parliamentary role and the constitutional court distinguishes between political activities and parliamentary activities, and even with respect to the latter, distinguishes between activities which are immune and activities which are not immune because they contradict other constitutional principles and rights. the principle of inviolability results from constitutional law #3 of 1993, which revoked the earlier system of "authorisation to proceed"  (autorizzazione a procedere) for convictions in cases with defined sentences.
finally, article 69 states that "members of parliament receive compensation set down by the law," thereby affirming that parliamentarians must receive compensation and cannot renounce that compensation. this reverses the principle laid down in the albertine statute, which was the opposite, and is linked to the principle of equality (article 3) and the prohibition on imperative mandate (article 67).

electoral system[edit]
main article: italian electoral law
this section needs to be updated. please update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (september 2018)
election of the senate[edit]
 number of senators currently assigned to each region.
the election of the senate is still regulated by law n. 270 of 21 december 2005, which however was judged to be partly unconstitutional by the constitutional court in december 2013.[28] it introduces a regional based proportional representation system corrected with a majority bonus, with the following characteristics:[29]

the election uses a closed list system: seats are assigned based on the order of the candidates in the party list.
parties can run in coalitions. to be entitled to a share of seats, parties or coalitions need to pass an elaborate system of election threshold, based on regional votes: coalitions need to have at least 20% of the votes and a list with at least 3% of the votes; parties or lists need at least 8% of the votes (lowered to 3% if the party or list is part of a coalition that meets the threshold).
in each region, except for three, at least 55% of the seats are assigned to the coalition or list which received the most votes. the aosta valley elects one senator, so it uses a first past the post system. molise elects two senators with a proportional system (no majority bonus). trentino-south tyrol uses a mixed member proportional system: it elects 6 senators in first past the post constituencies, plus one senator based on regional proportional voting.
the constitutional court found the majority bonus and the lack of preference voting of the electoral law to be unconstitutional. with those provisions now null and void, the voting system for electing the senate became an open list proportional representation system, while still retaining the possibility to form coalitions and the high election thresholds.[30]

election of the chamber of deputies[edit]
the election of the chamber of deputies is regulated by law n. 52 of 6 may 2015,[31] which however was judged to be partly unconstitutional by the constitutional court in january 2017. it introduces a two-round system based on party-list proportional representation, with the following characteristics:[32]

the party or list which gains 40% or more of the votes during the first turn gains 340 seats (out of 630). the remaining 290 seats are proportionally distributed among the other parties which pass a 3% election threshold.
if no party manages to gain 40% or more of the votes on the first round, a second round of voting is held between the two parties which received the most votes. the winner of the second round gains 340 seats.
the national territory is divided into 20 electoral districts, further divided into 100 multi-member constituencies, except in the aosta valley and trentino-south tyrol regions, where constituencies are single-member.
the first elected candidate for each list is always the first candidate on the list (capolista). starting from the second candidate, seats are assigned according to open list preferences: each voter can express two preferences, but they must be for candidates of different genders.
the law, which came into force on 1 july 2016, has yet to be used for an election. in january 2017, the constitutional court judged the majority bonus in the second round (but not the one in the first round, subject to a threshold of 40% of the votes), as well as the ability of the capolista running in multiple constituencies to choose in respect of which constituency they are elected, to be unconstitutional.

overseas constituencies[edit]
main article: overseas constituencies of the parliament of italy
the italian parliament is one of the few legislatures in the world to reserve seats for those citizens residing abroad. there are twelve such seats in the chamber of deputies and six in the senate.[33]

membership[edit]
senate of the republic[edit]
 palazzo madama, seat of the senate of the republic.
the current membership of the senate of the republic, following the latest political elections of 4 march 2018:





coalition

party

seats

%




centre-right coalition



league (l)

58

18.4




forza italia (fi)

58

18.4




brothers of italy (fdi)

16

5.1




us with italy (nci)

5

1.6


total seats

137

43.5




five star movement (m5s)

112

35.5




centre-left coalition



democratic party (pd)

53

16.8




more europe (+e)

1

0.3




together (i)

1

0.3




popular civic list (cp)

1

0.3




svp–patt

3

1.0




aosta valley (vda)

1

0.3


total seats

60

19.1




free and equal (leu)

4

1.3




associative movement italians abroad (maie)

1

0.3




south american union italian emigrants (usei)

1

0.3


total

315

100




popular vote (s)








cdx
 
37.49%


m5s
 
32.22%


csx
 
22.99%


others
 
7.3%







distribution of the 315 parliamentary seats (s)








cdx
 
43.5%


m5s
 
35.5%


csx
 
19.1%


others
 
1.9%




chamber of deputies[edit]
 palazzo montecitorio, seat of the chamber of deputies.
the current membership of the chamber of deputies, following the latest political elections of 4 march 2018:





coalition

party

seats

%




centre-right coalition



league (l)

124

19.6




forza italia (fi)

106

16.8




brothers of italy (fdi)

32

4.9




us with italy (nci)

4

0.6


total seats

266

42.1




five star movement (m5s)

227

36.1




centre-left coalition



democratic party (pd)

111

17.8




more europe (+e)

3

0.5




together (i)

1

0.1




popular civic list (cp)

2

0.3




svp–patt

4

0.6


total seats

121

19.4




free and equal (leu)

14

2.2




associative movement italians abroad (maie)

1

0.1




south american union italian emigrants (usei)

1

0.1


total

630

100




popular vote (s)








cdx
 
37.00%


m5s
 
32.66%


csx
 
22.85%


others
 
7.49%







distribution of the 630 parliamentary seats (c)








cdx
 
42.1%


m5s
 
36.1%


csx
 
19.4%


others
 
2.4%




see also[edit]



wikimedia commons has media related to parliaments of italy.
constituent assembly of italy
italian parliament (1928–1939)
politics of italy
prime minister of italy
roman senate
notes[edit]


references[edit]


^ maie , independents

^ article 56 of the constitution

^ articles 57, 58, and 59 of the constitution

^ disposizioni generali in materia di cerimoniale e disciplina delle precedenze tra le cariche pubbliche. (in italian)

^ constitutional law n.2 of 9 february 1963.

^ article 59 of the constitution.

^ a b article 56 of the constitution.

^ a b article 58 of the constitution.

^ article 84 of the constitution.

^ against the mingling of confidence vote and legislative process see (in italian) d. argondizzo and g. buonomo, spigolature intorno all’attuale bicameralismo e proposte per quello futuro, in mondoperaio online, 2 aprile 2014.

^ article 72 of the constitution

^ ((https://www.academia.edu/2462641/esame_parlamentare_dei_documenti_finanziari_in_sessione_di_bilancio))

^ bin, roverto and pitruzella, giovanni (2008), diritto costituzionale, g. giappichelli editore, turin, p. 322.

^ article 63 of the constitution

^ article 55 of the constitution.

^ article 83 of the constitution.

^ article 91 of the constitution.

^ article 90 of the constitution.

^ article 104 of the constitution.

^ law of 24 march 1958, article 22, n. 195

^ a b article 135 of the constitution.

^ constitutional law of 22 november 1967, article 3, n. 2

^ paolo caretti e ugo de siervo, istituzioni di diritto pubblico, torino, giappichelli editore, pag. 239. in the same chapter, the authors stress that the convention which drafted the constitution considered giving more powers to the joint sessions, but this was rejected in the hope of maintaining the bicameral system.

^ judgement. no. 129/1981

^ according to the european court of human rights, in italy "«autodichia», c'est-à-dire l'autonomie normative du parlement" (judgement 28 april 2009, savino and others v. italy).

^ "consulta: "ammissibile il conflitto di attribuzione tra poteri dello stato" - il fatto quotidiano". 7 july 2015..mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/65/lock-green.svg/9px-lock-green.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d6/lock-gray-alt-2.svg/9px-lock-gray-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/aa/lock-red-alt-2.svg/9px-lock-red-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration{color:#555}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration span{border-bottom:1px dotted;cursor:help}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/wikisource-logo.svg/12px-wikisource-logo.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output code.cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:inherit;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#33aa33;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-right{padding-right:0.2em}

^ see giampiero buonomo, lo scudo di cartone, 2015, rubbettino editore, p. 224 (§ 5.5: la sentenza lorenzoni), isbn 9788849844405.

^ costituzionale, corte. "corte costituzionale". www.cortecostituzionale.it.

^ "archived copy". archived from the original on 2017-01-06. retrieved 2016-12-05.cs1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ benedetto, renato. "legge elettorale: italicum alla camera, consultellum al senato".

^ (in italian) legge 6 maggio 2015, n. 52.

^ "cosa prevede la legge elettorale italicum". 5 october 2016.

^ "presentazione delle candidature per la circoscrizione estero" [submission of nominations for the constituency abroad]. ministry of the interior of italy.


further reading[edit]
gilbert, mark (1995). the italian revolution: the end of politics, italian style?.
koff, sondra; stephen p. koff (2000). italy: from the first to the second republic.
pasquino, gianfranco (1995). "die reform eines wahlrechtssystems: der fall italien". politische institutionen im wandel.
external links[edit]
(in italian) official website
election resources for the parliament
vteitaly articleshistorychronology
prehistory
italic peoples
ancient peoples of italy
pre-nuragic sardinia
nuragic peoples
etruscan civilization
nuragic civilization
phoenician/carthaginian colonies
magna graecia
ancient rome
kingdom
republic
empire
middle ages
italy under odoacer
ostrogoths
byzantium
lombards
the holy roman empire
the sardinian judicates
arabs
normans
guelphs and ghibellines
the italian city-states
the maritime republics
renaissance
italian wars
early modern period
unification
revolutions of 1820
revolutions of 1830
revolutions of 1848
sicilian revolution of 1848
first war of independence
crimean war
second war of independence
expedition of the thousand
third war of independence
capture of rome
monarchy and the world wars
kingdom of italy
colonial empire
world war i
fascist italy
world war ii
resistance
civil war
republic
economic boom
years of lead
years of mud
mani pulite
by topic
citizenship
currency
economy
fashion
flags
genetic
historic states
military
music
postal
railways
geography
peninsula
northern
northwest
northeast
central
southern
south
insular
climate
fauna
flora
mountains
prealps
alps
apennines
volcanology
volcanoes
beaches
canals
caves
earthquakes
islands
lakes
national parks
rivers
valleys
politics
constitution
elections
referendums
foreign relations
missions
judiciary
law enforcement
military
parliament
chamber of deputies
senate
political parties
president
prime minister
council of ministers
regions
provinces
metropolitan cities
comune
municipalities
cities
economy
economic history
milan
naples
rome
turin
regions by gdp
automotive industry
banking
central bank
companies
energy
government debt
science and technology
stock exchange
taxation
telecommunications
internet
tourism
trade unions
transportation
welfare
society
abortion
adoption
billionaires
capital punishment
corruption
crime
demographics
education
secondary
higher
universities
emigration
fathers' rights movement
feminism
gambling
health
healthcare
immigration
lgbt rights
nobility
prostitution
racism
religion
smoking
social class
terrorism
women
culture
duecento
trecento
quattrocento
cinquecento
seicento
settecento
architecture
art
castles
cinema
cuisine
beer
wine
cultural icons
decorations
design
fashion
festivals
folklore
italian language
regional italian
italian literature
italophilia
italophobia
languages
media
newspapers
radio
tv
monuments
music
classical
folk
opera
popular
mythology
national symbols
anthem
emblem
flag
regions
national monument
personification
people
philosophy
public holidays
festa della repubblica
sculpture
sport
traditions
world heritage sites

 italy portal
 category
 commons
 news
quotes
travel
 wikiproject

vtenational bicameral legislaturesfederal
argentina
australia
austria
belgium
bosnia and herzegovina
brazil
canada
ethiopia
germany
india
malaysia
mexico
nepal
nigeria
pakistan
russia
somalia
south sudan
sudan
switzerland
united states
unitary
afghanistan
algeria
antigua and barbuda
bahamas
bahrain
barbados
belarus
belize
bhutan
bolivia
burundi
cambodia
cameroon
chile
colombia
democratic republic of the congo
republic of the congo
czech republic
dominican republic
equatorial guinea
france
gabon
grenada
haiti
indonesia
ireland
italy
ivory coast
jamaica
japan
jordan
kazakhstan
kenya
lesotho
liberia
madagascar
morocco
myanmar
namibia
netherlands
oman
palau
paraguay
philippines
poland
romania
rwanda
saint lucia
slovenia
south africa
spain
swaziland
tajikistan
trinidad and tobago
united kingdom
uruguay
uzbekistan
zimbabwe
dependent andother territories
american samoa
bermuda
isle of man
northern mariana islands
puerto rico
non-un states
somaliland
historical
confederate states (1862–1865)
czechoslovakia (1969–1992)
soviet union (1938–1991)
yugoslavia (1920–1992)
related
unicameralism
list of legislatures by country

national unicameral legislatures
national lower houses
national upper houses

vteparliament of europe sovereign states
albania
andorra
armenia
austria
azerbaijan
belarus
belgium
bosnia and herzegovina
bulgaria
croatia
cyprus
czech republic
denmark
estonia
finland
france
georgia
germany
greece
hungary
iceland
ireland

italy
kazakhstan
latvia
liechtenstein
lithuania
luxembourg
macedonia
malta
moldova
monaco
montenegro
netherlands
norway
poland
portugal
romania
russia
san marino
serbia
slovakia
slovenia
spain
sweden
switzerland
turkey
ukraine
united kingdom
vatican city
states with limitedrecognition
abkhazia
artsakh
kosovo
northern cyprus
south ossetia
transnistria
dependencies andother entities
åland
faroe islands
gibraltar
guernsey
isle of man
jersey
svalbard
other entities
european union




 
						retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=italian_parliament&oldid=883172661"					
categories: italian parliamentparliaments by country1861 establishments in italybicameral legislaturesnational legislaturesitalian constitutional institutionshidden categories: articles with italian-language external linksarticles containing italian-language textcs1 maint: archived copy as titlewikipedia articles in need of updating from december 2017all wikipedia articles in need of updatingpages using deprecated image syntaxwikipedia articles in need of updating from september 2018pages using bar box without float left or float rightcommons category link is on wikidata 



navigation menu


personal tools

not logged intalkcontributionscreate accountlog in 



namespaces

articletalk 




variants







views

readeditview history 



more





search



 







navigation


main pagecontentsfeatured contentcurrent eventsrandom articledonate to wikipediawikipedia store 



interaction


helpabout wikipediacommunity portalrecent changescontact page 



tools


what links hererelated changesupload filespecial pagespermanent linkpage informationwikidata itemcite this page 



print/export


create a bookdownload as pdfprintable version 



in other projects


wikimedia commonswikinews 



languages


العربيةasturianuбеларускаябългарскиcatalàdanskdeutscheestiελληνικάespañolesperantofrançais한국어հայերենbahasa indonesiaíslenskaitalianoעבריתlatinalumbaartmagyarnederlands日本語norskpolskiportuguêsromânăрусскийslovenščinaсрпски / srpskisuomisvenskatürkçeукраїнськаvènetotiếng việt中文 
edit links 





 this page was last edited on 13 february 2019, at 18:49 (utc).
text is available under the creative commons attribution-sharealike license;
additional terms may apply.  by using this site, you agree to the terms of use and privacy policy. wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the wikimedia foundation, inc., a non-profit organization.


privacy policy
about wikipedia
disclaimers
contact wikipedia
developers
cookie statement
mobile view



 

 



(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgpageparsereport":{"limitreport":{"cputime":"1.488","walltime":"1.775","ppvisitednodes":{"value":15659,"limit":1000000},"ppgeneratednodes":{"value":0,"limit":1500000},"postexpandincludesize":{"value":252702,"limit":2097152},"templateargumentsize":{"value":48922,"limit":2097152},"expansiondepth":{"value":13,"limit":40},"expensivefunctioncount":{"value":26,"limit":500},"unstrip-depth":{"value":1,"limit":20},"unstrip-size":{"value":35597,"limit":5000000},"entityaccesscount":{"value":1,"limit":400},"timingprofile":["100.00% 1365.056      1 -total"," 23.26%  317.528      8 template:navbox"," 21.03%  287.077      2 template:reflist"," 15.69%  214.245      1 template:europe_topic"," 14.83%  202.495      1 template:infobox_legislature"," 14.09%  192.272      2 template:lang-it"," 13.31%  181.735      1 template:infobox"," 12.73%  173.707     49 template:iso2country"," 10.86%  148.297      6 template:cite_web","  8.24%  112.499      1 template:italy_topics"]},"scribunto":{"limitreport-timeusage":{"value":"0.580","limit":"10.000"},"limitreport-memusage":{"value":19209920,"limit":52428800},"limitreport-logs":"table#1 {\n  [\"size\"] = \"tiny\",\n}\n"},"cachereport":{"origin":"mw1246","timestamp":"20190219145428","ttl":2073600,"transientcontent":false}}});mw.config.set({"wgbackendresponsetime":1920,"wghostname":"mw1246"});});


