



allies of world war ii - wikipedia
document.documentelement.classname = document.documentelement.classname.replace( /(^|\s)client-nojs(\s|$)/, "$1client-js$2" );
(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgcanonicalnamespace":"","wgcanonicalspecialpagename":false,"wgnamespacenumber":0,"wgpagename":"allies_of_world_war_ii","wgtitle":"allies of world war ii","wgcurrevisionid":883589225,"wgrevisionid":883589225,"wgarticleid":2198844,"wgisarticle":true,"wgisredirect":false,"wgaction":"view","wgusername":null,"wgusergroups":["*"],"wgcategories":["cs1 spanish-language sources (es)","cs1 maint: bot: original-url status unknown","articles with romanian-language external links","webarchive template wayback links","cs1: long volume value","articles with serbian-language external links","wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages","wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages","articles with short description","use dmy dates from september 2012","articles to be expanded from july 2014","all articles to be expanded","articles with empty sections from july 2014","all articles with empty sections","articles using small message boxes","all articles with unsourced statements","articles with unsourced statements from may 2014","articles with unsourced statements from february 2015","articles with unsourced statements from january 2018","wikipedia articles with gnd identifiers","wikipedia articles with nkc identifiers","20th-century military alliances","military alliances involving canada","military alliances involving the united kingdom","military alliances involving the united states","military alliances involving australia","military alliances involving new zealand","military alliances involving south africa","military alliances involving france","politics of world war ii"],"wgbreakframes":false,"wgpagecontentlanguage":"en","wgpagecontentmodel":"wikitext","wgseparatortransformtable":["",""],"wgdigittransformtable":["",""],"wgdefaultdateformat":"dmy","wgmonthnames":["","january","february","march","april","may","june","july","august","september","october","november","december"],"wgmonthnamesshort":["","jan","feb","mar","apr","may","jun","jul","aug","sep","oct","nov","dec"],"wgrelevantpagename":"allies_of_world_war_ii","wgrelevantarticleid":2198844,"wgrequestid":"xgvvawpaideaaklgsziaaaal","wgcspnonce":false,"wgisprobablyeditable":false,"wgrelevantpageisprobablyeditable":false,"wgrestrictionedit":["autoconfirmed"],"wgrestrictionmove":["sysop"],"wgflaggedrevsparams":{"tags":{}},"wgstablerevisionid":null,"wgcategorytreepagecategoryoptions":"{\"mode\":0,\"hideprefix\":20,\"showcount\":true,\"namespaces\":false}","wgwikieditorenabledmodules":[],"wgbetafeaturesfeatures":[],"wgmediavieweronclick":true,"wgmediaviewerenabledbydefault":true,"wgpopupsshouldsendmoduletouser":true,"wgpopupsconflictswithnavpopupgadget":false,"wgvisualeditor":{"pagelanguagecode":"en","pagelanguagedir":"ltr","pagevariantfallbacks":"en","usepageimages":true,"usepagedescriptions":true},"wgmfispagecontentmodeleditable":true,"wgmfenablefontchanger":true,"wgmfdisplaywikibasedescriptions":{"search":true,"nearby":true,"watchlist":true,"tagline":false},"wgrelatedarticles":null,"wgrelatedarticlesusecirrussearch":true,"wgrelatedarticlesonlyusecirrussearch":false,"wgwmeschemaeditattemptstepoversample":false,"wgpoweredbyhhvm":true,"wgulscurrentautonym":"english","wgnoticeproject":"wikipedia","wgcentralnoticecookiestodelete":[],"wgcentralnoticecategoriesusinglegacy":["fundraising","fundraising"],"wgwikibaseitemid":"q329888","wgscorenotelanguages":{"arabic":"العربية","catalan":"català","deutsch":"deutsch","english":"english","espanol":"español","italiano":"italiano","nederlands":"nederlands","norsk":"norsk","portugues":"português","suomi":"suomi","svenska":"svenska","vlaams":"west-vlams"},"wgscoredefaultnotelanguage":"nederlands","wgcentralauthmobiledomain":false,"wgcodemirrorenabled":true,"wgvisualeditortoolbarscrolloffset":0,"wgvisualeditorunsupportededitparams":["undo","undoafter","veswitched"],"wgeditsubmitbuttonlabelpublish":true,"oreswikiid":"enwiki","oresbaseurl":"http://ores.discovery.wmnet:8081/","oresapiversion":3});mw.loader.state({"ext.gadget.charinsert-styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site.styles":"ready","site.styles":"ready","noscript":"ready","user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site":"ready","user":"ready","user.options":"ready","user.tokens":"loading","ext.cite.styles":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.shared":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.commonprint":"ready","mediawiki.toc.styles":"ready","wikibase.client.init":"ready","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.noscript":"ready","ext.uls.interlanguage":"ready","ext.wikimediabadges":"ready","ext.3d.styles":"ready","mediawiki.skinning.interface":"ready","skins.vector.styles":"ready"});mw.loader.implement("user.tokens@0tffind",function($,jquery,require,module){/*@nomin*/mw.user.tokens.set({"edittoken":"+\\","patroltoken":"+\\","watchtoken":"+\\","csrftoken":"+\\"});
});rlpagemodules=["ext.cite.ux-enhancements","site","mediawiki.page.startup","mediawiki.page.ready","jquery.tablesorter","mediawiki.toc","mediawiki.searchsuggest","ext.gadget.teahouse","ext.gadget.referencetooltips","ext.gadget.watchlist-notice","ext.gadget.drn-wizard","ext.gadget.charinsert","ext.gadget.reftoolbar","ext.gadget.extra-toolbar-buttons","ext.gadget.switcher","ext.centralauth.centralautologin","mmv.head","mmv.bootstrap.autostart","ext.popups","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.init","ext.visualeditor.targetloader","ext.eventlogging","ext.wikimediaevents","ext.navigationtiming","ext.uls.eventlogger","ext.uls.init","ext.uls.compactlinks","ext.uls.interface","ext.quicksurveys.init","ext.centralnotice.geoip","ext.centralnotice.startup","skins.vector.js"];mw.loader.load(rlpagemodules);});





















 






allies of world war ii 
from wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 jump to navigation
jump to search


grouping of the victorious countries of world war ii


allies of world war iiunited nations1939–1945
     allies and their colonies
     allies entering after the attack on pearl harbor
     axis powers and co-belligerents
     neutral powers and their colonies


 the "big four":
 united states (from december 1941)
 soviet union (from june 1941)
 united kingdom
 china


 occupied countries with governments-in-exile:
 france
 poland
 yugoslavia
 greece
 netherlands
 belgium
 norway
 czechoslovakia
 luxembourg


 other allied combatant states:
 india
 canada
 australia
 new zealand
 south africa
 nepal
 ethiopia
 brazil
 philippines
 mongolia
 mexico
 cuba


former axis powers or co-belligerents:
 italy (from 1943)
 romania (from 1944)
 bulgaria (from 1944)
 finland (from 1944)
statusmilitary alliancehistorical eraworld war ii• anglo-polishalliance 31 march 1939• tehranconference 28 nov.–1 dec.1943• bretton woods conference 1–15 july1944• yaltaconference 4–11 february1945• united nationsformed 25 apr.–26 jun.1945• potsdamconference 17 jul.–2 aug. 1945

 the "united nations honour flag", used as a symbol of the wartime allies, c. 1943–1948
 the allied leaders of the european theatre: joseph stalin, franklin d. roosevelt and winston churchill meeting at the tehran conference in 1943
 the allied leaders of the asian and pacific theater: generalissimo chiang kai-shek, franklin d. roosevelt, and winston churchill meeting at the cairo conference in 1943
the allies of world war ii, called the united nations from the 1 january 1942 declaration, were the countries that together opposed the axis powers during the second world war (1939–1945). the allies promoted the alliance as a means to control german, japanese and italian aggression.
at the start of the war on 1 september 1939, the allies consisted of france, poland and the united kingdom, as well as their dependent states, such as british india. within days they were joined by the independent dominions of the british commonwealth: australia, canada, new zealand and south africa.[1] after the start of the german invasion of north europe until the balkan campaign, the netherlands, belgium, greece, and yugoslavia joined the allies. after first having cooperated with germany in invading poland whilst remaining neutral in the allied-axis conflict, the soviet union perforce joined the allies in june 1941 after being invaded by germany. the united states provided war materiel and money all along, and officially joined in december 1941 after the japanese attack on pearl harbor. china had already been in a prolonged war with japan since the marco polo bridge incident of 1937, but officially joined the allies in 1941.
the alliance was formalised by the declaration by united nations, from 1 january 1942. however, the name united nations was rarely used to describe the allies during the war. the leaders of the "big three"—the soviet union, the united kingdom, and the united states—controlled allied strategy; relations between the united kingdom and the united states were especially close. the big three together with china were referred as a "trusteeship of the powerful",[2] then were recognized as the allied "big four" in the declaration by united nations[3] and later as the "four policemen" of the united nations. after the war ended, the allied nations became the basis of the modern united nations.[4]

.mw-parser-output .toclimit-2 .toclevel-1 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-3 .toclevel-2 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-4 .toclevel-3 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-5 .toclevel-4 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-6 .toclevel-5 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-7 .toclevel-6 ul{display:none}contents

1 origins and creation
2 major affiliated state combatants

2.1 united kingdom

2.1.1 war declared

2.1.1.1 colonies and dependencies

2.1.1.1.1 in africa
2.1.1.1.2 in the americas
2.1.1.1.3 in asia
2.1.1.1.4 in europe






2.2 china

2.2.1 factions

2.2.1.1 nationalists
2.2.1.2 communists




2.3 france

2.3.1 war declared
2.3.2 colonies and dependencies

2.3.2.1 in africa
2.3.2.2 in asia and oceania
2.3.2.3 in the americas




2.4 soviet union

2.4.1 outbreak
2.4.2 history


2.5 united states

2.5.1 war justifications
2.5.2 history
2.5.3 colonies and dependencies

2.5.3.1 in the americas and the pacific
2.5.3.2 in asia






3 other affiliated state combatants

3.1 australia
3.2 belgium

3.2.1 colonies and dependencies


3.3 brazil
3.4 canada
3.5 cuba
3.6 czechoslovakia
3.7 dominican republic
3.8 greece
3.9 luxembourg
3.10 mexico
3.11 netherlands

3.11.1 colonies and dependencies


3.12 new zealand
3.13 norway
3.14 poland
3.15 south africa
3.16 yugoslavia

3.16.1 resistance factions

3.16.1.1 partisans
3.16.1.2 chetniks






4 client states

4.1 british

4.1.1 egypt
4.1.2 india (british raj)
4.1.3 iran
4.1.4 iraq


4.2 soviet

4.2.1 bulgaria
4.2.2 mongolia
4.2.3 poland
4.2.4 romania
4.2.5 tannu tuva




5 co-belligerent state combatants

5.1 italy


6 associated power

6.1 albania


7 self-proclaimed allies

7.1 provisional government of the republic of korea


8 united nations

8.1 declaration by united nations
8.2 alliance growing
8.3 charter of the united nations


9 timeline of allied nations entering the war

9.1 1939
9.2 1940
9.3 1941
9.4 provisional governments or governments-in exile that declared war against the axis in 1941
9.5 1942
9.6 1943
9.7 1944
9.8 1945


10 see also
11 footnotes
12 bibliography
13 further reading
14 external links



members

origins and creation
main articles: causes of world war ii and grand alliance (world war ii)
the origins of the allied powers stem from the allies of world war i and cooperation of the victorious powers at the paris peace conference, 1919. germany resented signing treaty of versailles. the new weimar republic's legitimacy became shaken. however, the 1920s were peaceful.
with the wall street crash of 1929 and the ensuing great depression, political unrest in europe soared including the rise in support of revanchist nationalists in germany who blamed the severity of the economic crisis on the treaty of versailles. by the early 1930s, the nazi party led by adolf hitler became the dominant revanchist movement in germany and hitler and the nazis gained power in 1933. the nazi regime demanded the immediate cancellation of the treaty of versailles and made claims to german-populated austria, and german-populated territories of czechoslovakia. the likelihood of war was high, and the question was whether it could be avoided through strategies such as appeasement.
in asia, when japan seized manchuria in 1931, the league of nations condemned it for aggression against china. japan responded by leaving the league of nations in march 1933. after four quiet years, the sino-japanese war erupted in 1937 with japanese forces invading china. the league of nations condemned japan's actions and initiated sanctions on japan. the united states, in particular, was angered at japan and sought to support china.

@media all and (max-width:720px){.mw-parser-output .tmulti>.thumbinner{width:100%!important;max-width:none!important}.mw-parser-output .tmulti .tsingle{float:none!important;max-width:none!important;width:100%!important;text-align:center}}british wartime poster supporting poland after the german invasion of the country (european theater)american wartime poster promoting aid to china during the second sino-japanese war (pacific theater)
in march 1939, germany took over czechoslovakia, violating the munich agreement signed six months before, and demonstrating that the appeasement policy was a failure. britain and france decided that hitler had no intention to uphold diplomatic agreements and responded by preparing for war. on 31 march 1939, britain formed the anglo-polish military alliance in an effort to avert a german attack on the country. also, the french had a long-standing alliance with poland since 1921. the soviet union sought an alliance with the western powers, but hitler ended the risk of a war with stalin by signing the nazi–soviet non-aggression pact in august 1939. the agreement secretly divided the independent nations of eastern europe between the two powers and assured adequate oil supplies for the german war machine. on 1 september 1939, germany invaded poland; two days later britain and france declared war on germany. then, on 17 september 1939, the soviet union invaded poland from the east. a polish government-in-exile was set up and it continued to be one of the allies, a model followed by other occupied countries. after a quiet winter, germany in april 1940 invaded and quickly defeated denmark, norway, belgium, the netherlands and france. britain and its empire stood alone against hitler and mussolini. in june 1941, hitler broke the non-aggression agreement with stalin and germany invaded the soviet union. in december, japan attacked the us and britain. the main lines of world war ii had formed.

major affiliated state combatants
main articles: four policemen and diplomatic history of world war ii
during december 1941, u.s. president franklin d. roosevelt devised the name "united nations" for the allies and proposed it to british prime minister winston churchill.[5][6] he referred to the big three and china as a "trusteeship of the powerful", and then later the "four policemen".[2] the declaration by united nations on 1 january 1942 was the basis of the modern united nations (un).[7] at the potsdam conference of july–august 1945, roosevelt's successor, harry s. truman, proposed that the foreign ministers of china, france, the soviet union, the united kingdom, and the united states "should draft the peace treaties and boundary settlements of europe", which led to the creation of the council of foreign ministers of the "big five", and soon thereafter the establishment of those states as the permanent members of the unsc.[8]

united kingdom
further information: military history of the united kingdom during world war ii
 british supermarine spitfire fighter aircraft (bottom) flying past a german heinkel he 111 bomber aircraft (top) during the battle of britain (1940)
 british crusader tanks during the north african campaign
 british aircraft carrier hms ark royal under attack from italian aircraft during the battle of cape spartivento (nov. 27, 1940)
 british soldiers of the king's own yorkshire light infantry in elst, netherlands on 2 march 1945
war declared
great britain and other members of the british commonwealth, most known as the dominions, declared war on germany separately from 3 september 1939 with the uk first, all within one week of each other; these countries were canada, australia, new zealand, india and south africa.

colonies and dependencies
further information: british empire in world war ii
in africa
further information: southern rhodesia in world war ii
british west africa and the british colonies in east and southern africa participated, mainly in the north african, east african and middle-eastern theatres. two west african and one east african division served in the burma campaign.
southern rhodesia was a self-governing colony, having received responsible government in 1923. it was not a sovereign dominion. it governed itself internally and controlled its own armed forces, but had no diplomatic autonomy, and, therefore, was officially at war as soon as britain was at war. the southern rhodesian colonial government issued a symbolic declaration of war nevertheless on 3 september 1939, which made no difference diplomatically, but preceded the declarations of war made by all other british dominions and colonies.[9]

in the americas
these included: the british west indies, british honduras, british guiana and the falkland islands. newfoundland was ruled as a royal colony in 1933–49, with a governor appointed by london who made the decisions.

in asia
further information: india in world war ii and indian army during world war ii
british india included the areas and peoples covered by later india, bangladesh, pakistan and (until 1937) burma/myanmar, which later became a separate colony.
british malaya covers the areas of peninsular malaysia and singapore, while british borneo covers the area of brunei, including sabah and sarawak of malaysia.
territories controlled by the colonial office, namely the crown colonies, were controlled politically by the uk and therefore also entered hostilities with britain's declaration of war. at the outbreak of world war ii, the british indian army numbered 205,000 men. later during world war ii, the indian army became the largest all-volunteer force in history, rising to over 2.5 million men in size.[10] these forces included tank, artillery and airborne forces. indian soldiers earned 30 victoria crosses during the second world war. it suffered 87,000 military casualties (more than any crown colony but fewer than the united kingdom). the uk suffered 382,000 military casualties.
protectorates included: kuwait was a protectorate of the united kingdom formally established in 1920. the trucial states were protectorates in the persian gulf.
palestine was a mandate dependency created in the peace agreements after world war i from former territory of the ottoman empire, iraq.

in europe
the cyprus regiment was formed by the british government during the second world war and made part of the british army structure. it was mostly greek cypriot volunteers and turkish speaking cypriot inhabitants of cyprus but also included other commonwealth nationalities. on a brief visit to cyprus in 1943, winston churchill praised the "soldiers of the cyprus regiment who have served honourably on many fields from libya to dunkirk". about 30,000 cypriots served in the cyprus regiment. the regiment was involved in action from the very start and served at dunkirk, in the greek campaign (battle of greece) (about 600 soldiers were captured in kalamata in 1941), north africa (operation compass), france, the middle east and italy. many soldiers were taken prisoner especially at the beginning of the war and were interned in various pow camps (stalag) including lamsdorf (stalag viii-b), stalag ivc at wistritz bei teplitz and stalag 4b near most in the czech republic. the soldiers captured in kalamata were transported by train to prisoner of war camps.

china
main article: second sino-japanese war
in the 1920s the soviet union provided military assistance to the kuomintang, or the nationalists and helped reorganize their party along leninist lines: a unification of party, state, and army. in exchange the nationalists agreed to let members of the chinese communist party join the nationalists on an individual basis. however, following the nominal unification of china at the end of the northern expedition in 1928, generalissimo chiang kai-shek purged leftists from his party and fought against the revolting chinese communist party, former warlords, and other militarist factions. a fragmented china provided easy opportunities for japan to gain territories piece by piece without engaging in total war. following the 1931 mukden incident, the puppet state of manchukuo was established. throughout the early to mid-1930s, chiang's anti-communist and anti-militarist campaigns continued while he fought small, incessant conflicts against japan, usually followed by unfavorable settlements and concessions after military defeats.
in 1936 chiang was forced to cease his anti-communist military campaigns after his kidnap and release by zhang xueliang, and reluctantly formed a nominal alliance with the communists, while the communists agreed to fight under the nominal command of the nationalists against the japanese. following the marco polo bridge incident of 7 july 1937, china and japan became embroiled in a full-scale war. the soviet union, wishing to keep china in the fight against japan, supplied china with military assistance until 1941, when it signed a non-aggression pact with japan. continuous clashes between the communists and nationalists behind enemy lines cumulated in a major military conflict between these two former allies that effectively ended their cooperation against the japanese, and china had been divided between the internationally recognized nationalist china under the leadership of generalissimo chiang kai-shek and communist china under the leadership of mao zedong until the japanese surrendered in 1945.

factions
nationalists
main article: nationalist government
 soldiers of the national revolutionary army associated with nationalist china, during the second sino-japanese war
prior to the alliance of germany and italy to japan, the nationalist government held close relations with both germany and italy. in the early 1930s, sino-german cooperation between the nationalist government and germany in military and industrial matters. nazi germany provided the largest proportion of chinese arms imports and technical expertise. relations between the nationalist government and italy during the 1930s varied, however even after the nationalist government followed league of nations sanctions against italy for its invasion of ethiopia, the international sanctions proved unsuccessful, and relations between the fascist government in italy and the nationalist government in china returned to normal shortly afterwards.[10] up until 1936, mussolini had provided the nationalists with italian military air and naval missions to help the nationalists fight against japanese incursions and communist insurgents.[10] italy also held strong commercial interests and a strong commercial position in china supported by the italian concession in tianjin.[10] however, after 1936 the relationship between the nationalist government and italy changed due to a japanese diplomatic proposal to recognize the italian empire that included occupied ethiopia within it in exchange for italian recognition of manchukuo, italian foreign minister galeazzo ciano accepted this offer by japan, and on 23 october 1936 japan recognized the italian empire and italy recognized manchukuo, as well as discussing increasing commercial links between italy and japan.[11]
the nationalist government held close relations with the united states. the united states opposed japan's invasion of china in 1937 that it considered an illegal violation of china's sovereignty, and offered the nationalist government diplomatic, economic, and military assistance during its war against japan. in particular, the united states sought to bring the japanese war effort to a complete halt by imposing a full embargo on all trade between the united states to japan, japan was dependent on the united states for 80 percent of its petroleum, resulting in an economic and military crisis for japan that could not continue its war effort with china without access to petroleum.[12] in november 1940, american military aviator claire lee chennault upon observing the dire situation in the air war between china and japan, set out to organize a volunteer squadron of american fighter pilots to fight alongside the chinese against japan, known as the flying tigers.[13] us president franklin d. roosevelt accepted dispatching them to china in early 1941.[13] however, they only became operational shortly after the attack on pearl harbor.
the soviet union recognised the republic of china but urged reconciliation with the communist party of china and inclusion of communists in the government.[14] the soviet union also urged military and cooperation between nationalist china and communist china during the war.[14]
even though china had been fighting the longest among all the allied powers, it only officially joined the allies after the attack on pearl harbor, on 7 december 1941. china fought the japanese empire before joining the allies in the pacific war. generalissimo chiang kai-shek thought allied victory was assured with the entrance of the united states into the war, and he declared war on germany and the other axis nations. however, allied aid remained low because the burma road was closed and the allies suffered a series of military defeats against japan early on in the campaign. general sun li-jen led the r.o.c. forces to the relief of 7,000 british forces trapped by the japanese in the battle of yenangyaung. he then reconquered north burma and re-established the land route to china by the ledo road. but the bulk of military aid did not arrive until the spring of 1945. more than 1.5 million japanese troops were trapped in the china theatre, troops that otherwise could have been deployed elsewhere if china had collapsed and made a separate peace.

communists
main article: communist-controlled china (1927–49)
 soldiers of the first workers' and peasants' army associated with communist china, during the sino-japanese war
 victorious chinese communist soldiers holding the flag of the republic of china during the hundred regiments offensive
communist china had been tacitly supported by the soviet union since the 1920s, though the soviet union diplomatically recognised the republic of china, joseph stalin supported cooperation between the nationalists and the communists—including pressuring the nationalist government to grant the communists state and military positions in the government.[14] this was continued into the 1930s that fell in line with the soviet union's subversion policy of popular fronts to increase communists' influence in governments.[14] the soviet union urged military and cooperation between soviet china and nationalist china during china's war against japan.[14] initially mao zedong accepted the demands of the soviet union and in 1938 had recognized chiang kai-shek as the "leader" of the "chinese people".[15] in turn, the soviet union accepted mao's tactic of "continuous guerilla warfare" in the countryside that involved a goal of extending the communist bases, even if it would result in increased tensions with the nationalists.[15]
after the breakdown of their cooperation with the nationalists in 1941, the communists prospered and grew as the war against japan dragged on, building up their sphere of influence wherever opportunities were presented, mainly through rural mass organizations, administrative, land and tax reform measures favoring poor peasants; while the nationalists attempted to neutralize the spread of communist influence by military blockade and fighting the japanese at the same time.[16]
the communist party's position in china was boosted further upon the soviet invasion of manchuria in august 1945 against the japanese puppet state of manchukuo and the japanese kwantung army in china and manchuria. upon the intervention of the soviet union against japan in world war ii in 1945, mao zedong in april and may 1945 had planned to mobilize 150,000 to 250,000 soldiers from across china to work with forces of the soviet union in capturing manchuria.[17]

france
main article: france during world war ii
further information: free france and military history of france during world war ii
 free french forces at the battle of bir hakeim (1942)
war declared
 fafl free french gc ii/5 "lafayette" receiving ex-usaaf curtiss p-40 fighters at casablanca, french morocco
 the french fleet scuttled itself rather than fall into the hands of the axis after their invasion of vichy france on 11 november 1942.
after germany invaded poland, france declared war on germany on 3 september 1939.[18] in january 1940, french prime minister édouard daladier made a major speech denouncing the actions of germany:

.mw-parser-output .templatequote{overflow:hidden;margin:1em 0;padding:0 40px}.mw-parser-output .templatequote .templatequotecite{line-height:1.5em;text-align:left;padding-left:1.6em;margin-top:0}at the end of five months of war, one thing has become more and more clear. it is that germany seeks to establish a domination of the world completely different from any known in world history.
the domination at which the nazis aim is not limited to the displacement of the balance of power and the imposition of the supremacy of one nation. it seeks the systematic and total destruction of those conquered by hitler and it does not treaty with the nations which it has subdued. he destroys them. he takes from them their whole political and economic existence and seeks even to deprive them of their history and culture. he wishes only to consider them as vital space and a vacant territory over which he has every right.
the human beings who constitute these nations are for him only cattle. he orders their massacre or migration. he compels them to make room for their conquerors. he does not even take the trouble to impose any war tribute on them. he just takes all their wealth and, to prevent any revolt, he scientifically seeks the physical and moral degradation of those whose independence he has taken away.[18]


france experienced several major phases of action during world war ii:

the "phoney war" of 1939–1940, also called drôle de guerre in france, dziwna wojna in poland (both meaning "strange war"), or the "sitzkrieg" ("sitting war") in germany.
the battle of france in may–june 1940, which resulted in the defeat of the allies, the fall of the french third republic, the german occupation of northern and western france, and the creation of the rump state vichy france, which received diplomatic recognition from the axis and most neutral countries including the united states.[19]
the period of resistance against the occupation and franco-french struggle for control of the colonies between the vichy regime and the free french, who continued the fight on the allies' side after the appeal of 18 june by general charles de gaulle, recognized by the united kingdom as france's government-in-exile. it culminated in the allied landings in north africa on 11 november 1942, when vichy ceased to exist as an independent entity after having been invaded by both the axis and the allies simultaneously, being thereafter only the nominal government in charge during the occupation of france. vichy forces in french north africa switched allegiance and merged with the free french to participate in the campaigns of tunisia and of italy and the invasion of corsica in 1943–44.
the liberation of mainland france beginning with d-day on 6 june 1944 and operation overlord, and then with operation dragoon on 15 august 1944, leading to the liberation of paris on 25 august 1944 by the free french 2e division blindée and the installation of the provisional government of the french republic in the newly liberated capital.
participation of the re-established provisional french republic's first army in the allied advance from paris to the rhine and the western allied invasion of germany until v-e day on 8 may 1945.
colonies and dependencies
in africa
in africa these included: french west africa, french equatorial africa, the league of nations mandates of french cameroun and french togoland, french madagascar, french somaliland, and the protectorates of french tunisia and french morocco.
french algeria was then not a colony or dependency but a fully-fledged part of metropolitan france.

in asia and oceania
 the fall of damascus to the allies, late june 1941. a car carrying free french commanders general georges catroux and general paul louis le gentilhomme enters the city, escorted by french circassian cavalry (gardes tcherkess).
in asia and oceania these included: french polynesia, wallis and futuna, new caledonia, the new hebrides, french indochina, french india, the mandates of greater lebanon and french syria. the french government in 1936 attempted to grant independence to its mandate of syria in the franco-syrian treaty of independence of 1936 signed by france and syria. however, opposition to the treaty grew in france and the treaty was not ratified. syria had become an official republic in 1930 and was largely self-governing. in 1941, a british-led invasion supported by free french forces expelled vichy french forces in operation exporter.

in the americas
in the americas these included: martinique, guadeloupe, french guiana and saint pierre and miquelon.

soviet union
further information: soviet union in world war ii
 soviet soldiers and t-34 tanks advance in skirmish near bryansk in 1942.
 soviet soldiers fighting in the ruins of stalingrad during the battle of stalingrad
 soviet il-2 ground attack aircraft attacking german ground forces during the battle of kursk (1943)
outbreak
the german invasion of the soviet union, operation barbarossa, began on 22 june 1941. general secretary joseph stalin and the government of the soviet union described the soviet war effort as a war being fought by the soviet people for their survival.[20] stalin had supported popular front movements of anti-fascists including communists and non-communists from 1935 to 1939.[21] the popular front strategy was terminated from 1939 to 1941 when the soviet union cooperated with germany in 1939 in the occupation and partitioning of poland while the soviet union refused to endorse either the allies or the axis from 1939 to 1941, as it called the allied-axis conflict an "imperialist war".[21] after the invasion of the soviet union in 1941, stalin endorsed the western allies as part of a renewed popular front strategy against germany and called for the international communist movement to make a coalition with all those who opposed the nazis.[21]
the soviet union intervened against japan and its client state in manchuria in 1945, cooperating with the nationalist government of china and the nationalist party led by chiang kai-shek; though also cooperating, preferring, and encouraging the communist party led by mao zedong to take effective control of manchuria after expelling japanese forces.[22]

history
in the lead up to the war between the soviet union and germany, relations between the soviet union and germany underwent several stages. stalin studied hitler, including reading mein kampf and from it knew of hitler's desire to destroy the soviet union.[23] in 1933, the soviet union had immediate concerns with the threat of a potential german invasion of the country should germany attempt a conquest of the baltic states, and in december of that year, polish-soviet negotiations began for the issuing of a joint declaration by the two countries guaranteeing the sovereignty of the baltic states.[24] however, poland withdrew from the negotiations following german and finnish objections.[24] the soviet union and germany at this time competed with each other for influence in poland.[25] the soviet government also was concerned with the anti-soviet sentiment in poland and particularly józef piłsudski's proposed polish federation that would include the territories of poland, lithuania, belarus, and ukraine within it that threatened the territorial integrity of the soviet union.[26]
on 20 august 1939, forces of the union of soviet socialist republics under general georgy zhukov, together with the people's republic of mongolia eliminated the threat of conflict in the east with a victory over imperial japan at the battle of khalkhin gol in eastern mongolia.
on the same day, soviet party leader joseph stalin received a telegram from german chancellor adolf hitler, suggesting that german foreign minister joachim von ribbentrop fly to moscow for diplomatic talks. (after receiving a lukewarm response throughout the spring and summer, stalin abandoned attempts for a better diplomatic relationship with france and the united kingdom.)[27]
on 23 august, ribbentrop and soviet foreign minister vyacheslav molotov signed the non-aggression pact including secret protocols dividing eastern europe into defined "spheres of influence" for the two regimes, and specifically concerning the partition of the polish state in the event of its "territorial and political rearrangement".[28]
on 15 september 1939, stalin concluded a durable ceasefire with japan, to take effect the following day (it would be upgraded to a non-aggression pact in april 1941).[29] the day after that, 17 september, soviet forces invaded poland from the east. although some fighting continued until 5 october, the two invading armies held at least one joint military parade on 25 september, and reinforced their non-military partnership with the german–soviet treaty of friendship, cooperation and demarcation on 28 september.
on 30 november, the soviet union attacked finland, for which it was expelled from the league of nations. in the following year of 1940, while the world's attention was focused upon the german invasion of france and norway,[30] the ussr militarily[31] occupied the baltic states[32] of estonia, latvia and lithuania as well as parts of romania.
german-soviet treaties were brought to an end by the german surprise attack on the ussr on 22 june 1941. the soviet union soon entered in alliance with the united kingdom. following the ussr, a number of other communist, pro-soviet or soviet-controlled forces fought against the axis powers during the second world war. they were as follows: the albanian national liberation front, the chinese red army, the greek national liberation front, the hukbalahap, the malayan communist party, the people's republic of mongolia, the polish people's army, the tuvan people's republic (annexed by the soviet union in 1944),[33] the viet minh and the yugoslav partisans.

united states
further information: military history of the united states during world war ii
 american douglas sbd dauntless dive-bomber aircraft attacking the japanese cruiser mikuma during the battle of midway in june 1942
 american marines during the guadalcanal campaign in november 1942
 american consolidated b-24 liberator bomber aircraft during the bombing of oil refineries in ploiești, romania on 1 august 1943 during operation tidal wave
 american soldiers depart landing craft during the normandy landings on 6 june 1944 known as d-day, in the battle of normandy.
war justifications
the united states had indirectly supported britain's war effort against germany up to 1941 and declared its opposition to territorial aggrandizement. materiel support to britain was provided while the u.s. was officially neutral via the lend-lease act starting in 1941.
president franklin d. roosevelt and prime minister winston churchill in august 1941 promulgated the atlantic charter that pledged commitment to achieving "the final destruction of nazi tyranny".[34] signing the atlantic charter, and thereby joining the "united nations" was the way a nation joined the allies, and also became eligible for membership in the united nations world body that formed in 1945.
the us strongly supported the nationalist government in china in its war with japan, and provided military equipment, supplies, and volunteers to the nationalist government of china to assist in its war effort.[35] in december 1941 japan opened the war with its attack on pearl harbor, the us declared war on japan, and japan's allies germany and italy declared war on the us, bringing the us into world war ii.

history
on 8 december 1941, following the attack on pearl harbor, the united states congress declared war on japan at the request of president franklin d. roosevelt. this was followed by germany and italy declaring war on the united states on 11 december, bringing the country into the european theatre.
the us-led allied forces in the pacific theatre against japanese forces from 1941 to 1945. from 1943 to 1945, the us-led and coordinated the western allies' war effort in europe under the leadership of general dwight d. eisenhower.
the surprise attack on pearl harbor followed by japan's swift attacks on allied locations throughout the pacific, resulted in major us losses in the first several months in the war, including losing control of the philippines, guam, wake island and several aleutian islands including attu and kiska to japanese forces. american naval forces attained some early successes against japan. one was the bombing of japanese industrial centres in the doolittle raid. another was repelling a japanese invasion of port moresby in new guinea during the battle of the coral sea.[36] a major turning point in the pacific war was the battle of midway where american naval forces were outnumbered by japanese forces that had been sent to midway to draw out and destroy american aircraft carriers in the pacific and seize control of midway that would place japanese forces in proximity to hawaii.[37] however american forces managed to sink four of japan's six large aircraft carriers that had initiated the attack on pearl harbor along with other attacks on allied forces. afterwards the us began an offensive against japanese-captured positions. the guadalcanal campaign from 1942 to 1943 was a major contention point where allied and japanese forces struggled to gain control of guadalcanal.

colonies and dependencies
in the americas and the pacific
the united states held multiple dependencies in the americas, such as alaska, the panama canal zone, puerto rico, and the u.s. virgin islands.
in the pacific it held multiple island dependencies such as american samoa, guam, hawaii, midway islands, wake island and others. these dependencies were directly involved in the pacific campaign of the war.

in asia
 philippine scouts at fort william mckinley firing a 37 mm anti-tank gun in training
the commonwealth of the philippines was a sovereign protectorate referred to as an "associated state" of the united states. from late 1941 to 1944, the philippines was occupied by japanese forces, who established the second philippine republic as a client state that had nominal control over the country.

other affiliated state combatants
australia
further information: military history of australia during world war ii
australia was a sovereign dominion under the australian monarchy, as per the statute of westminster 1931. at the start of the war australia followed britain's foreign policies, and accordingly declared war against germany on 3 september 1939. australian foreign policy became more independent after the australian labor party formed government in october 1941, and australia separately declared war against finland, hungary and
romania on 8 december 1941 and against japan the next day.[38]

belgium
main article: belgium in world war ii
 members of the belgian resistance with a canadian soldier in bruges, september 1944 during the battle of the scheldt
before the war, belgium had pursued a policy of neutrality and only became an allied member after being invaded by germany on 10 may 1940. during the ensuing fighting, belgian forces fought alongside french and british forces against the invaders. while the british and french were struggling against the fast german advance elsewhere on the front, the belgian forces were pushed into a pocket to the north. finally, on 28 may, the king leopold iii surrendered himself and his military to the germans, having decided the allied cause was lost. the legal belgian government was reformed as a government in exile in london. belgian troops and pilots continued to fight on the allied side as the free belgian forces. belgium itself was occupied, but a sizeable resistance was formed and was loosely coordinated by the government in exile and other allied powers.
british and canadian troops arrived in belgium in september 1944 and the capital, brussels, was liberated on 6 september. because of the ardennes offensive, the country was only fully liberated in early 1945.

colonies and dependencies
belgium had the colony of the belgian congo and the league of nations mandate of ruanda-urundi. the belgian congo was not occupied and remained loyal to the allies as an important economic asset while its deposits of uranium were useful to the allied efforts to develop the atomic bomb. troops from the belgian congo participated in the east african campaign against the italians. the colonial force publique also served in other theatres including madagascar, the middle-east, india and burma within british units.

brazil
main article: brazilian expeditionary force
 brazilian soldiers of the brazilian expeditionary force greet civilians in the city of massarosa, italy, september 1944.
initially, brazil maintained a position of neutrality, trading with both the allies and the axis, while brazilian president getúlio vargas's quasi-fascist policies indicated a leaning toward the axis powers. however, as the war progressed, trade with the axis countries became almost impossible and the united states initiated forceful diplomatic and economic efforts to bring brazil onto the allied side.
at the beginning of 1942, brazil permitted the united states to set up air bases on its territory, especially in natal, strategically located at the easternmost corner of the south american continent, and on 28 january the country severed diplomatic relations with germany, japan and italy. after that, 36 brazilian merchant ships were sunk by the german and italian navies, which led the brazilian government to declare war against germany and italy on 22 august 1942.
brazil then sent a 25,700 strong expeditionary force to europe that fought mainly on the italian front, from september 1944 to may 1945. also, the brazilian navy and air force acted in the atlantic ocean from the middle of 1942 until the end of the war. brazil was the only south american country to send troops to fight in the european theatre in the second world war.

canada
main articles: declaration of war by canada § germany, and military history of canada during world war ii
canada was a sovereign dominion under the canadian monarchy, as per the statute of westminster 1931. in a symbolic statement of autonomous foreign policy prime minister william lyon mackenzie king delayed parliament's vote on a declaration of war for seven days after britain had declared war. canada was the last member of the commonwealth to declare war on germany on 10 september 1939.[39]

cuba
main article: cuba in world war ii
because of cuba's geographical position at the entrance of the gulf of mexico, havana's role as the principal trading port in the west indies, and the country's natural resources, cuba was an important participant in the american theater of world war ii, and subsequently one of the greatest beneficiaries of the united states' lend-lease program. cuba declared war on the axis powers in december 1941,[40] making it one of the first latin american countries to enter the conflict, and by the war's end in 1945 its military had developed a reputation as being the most efficient and cooperative of all the caribbean nations.[41] on 15 may 1943, the cuban patrol boat cs-13 sank the german submarine u-176.[42][43]

czechoslovakia
 ludvík svoboda with czechoslovak soldiers of the 1st czechoslovak army corps on the eastern front in 1943
czechoslovakia along with the united kingdom and france attempted to resolve german irredentist claims to the sudetenland region in 1938 with the munich agreement, however in march 1939, czechoslovakia was invaded by germany and partitioned between germany, hungary, poland, and a german client state of slovakia. the czechoslovak government-in-exile joined the allies, the occupation and partition of czechoslovakia amongst the axis powers was not accepted by the allied powers. czechoslovakian military units took part in the war.

dominican republic
the dominican republic was one of the very few countries willing to accept mass jewish immigration during world war ii. at the évian conference, it offered to accept up to 100,000 jewish refugees.[44] the dorsa (dominican republic settlement association) was formed with the assistance of the jdc, and helped settle jews in sosúa, on the northern coast. about 700 european jews of ashkenazi jewish descent reached the settlement where each family received 33 hectares (82 acres) of land, 10 cows (plus 2 additional cows per children), a mule and a horse, and a us$10,000 loan (about 170,000 dollars at 2019 prices) at 1% interest.[45][46]
the dominican republic officially declared war on the axis powers on december 11, 1941, after the attack on pearl harbor. however, the caribbean nation had already been engaged in war actions since before the formal declaration of war. dominican sailboats and schooners had been attacked on previous occasions by german submarines as, highlighting the case of the 1,993-ton merchant ship, "san rafael", which was making a trip from tampa, florida to kingston, jamaica, when 80 miles away from its final destination, it was torpedoed by the german submarine u-125, causing the command to abandon the ship by the commander. although the crew of san rafael managed to escape the event, it would be remembered by the dominican press as a sign of the infamy of the german submarines and the danger they represented in the caribbean.[47]
recently, due to a research work carried out by the embassy of the united states of america in santo domingo and the institute of dominican studies of the city of new york (cuny), documents of the department of defense were discovered in which it was confirmed that around 340 men and women of dominican origin were part of the us armed forces during the world war ii. many of them received medals and other recognitions for their outstanding actions in combat.[48]

greece
further information: military history of greece during world war ii and axis occupation of greece
 greek soldiers in march 1941 during the greco-italian war
greece was invaded by italy on 28 october 1940 and subsequently joined the allies. the greek army managed to stop the italian offensive from italy's protectorate of albania, and greek forces pushed italian forces back into albania. however, after the german invasion of greece in april 1941, german forces managed to occupy mainland greece and, a month later, the island of crete. the greek government went into exile, while the country was placed under a puppet government and divided into occupation zones run by italy, germany and bulgaria. from 1941, a strong resistance movement appeared, chiefly in the mountainous interior, where it established a "free greece" by mid-1943. following the italian capitulation in september 1943, the italian zone was taken over by the germans. axis forces left mainland greece in october 1944, although some aegean islands, notably crete, remained under german occupation until the end of the war.

luxembourg
main article: luxembourg in world war ii
see also: luxembourgish government in exile, luxembourg resistance, battle of the bulge, and luxembourg american cemetery and memorial
 soldiers from luxembourg training in britain, 1943
before the war, luxembourg had pursued a policy of neutrality and only became an allied member after being invaded by germany on 10 may 1940. the government in exile fled, winding up in england. it made luxembourgish language broadcasts to the occupied country on bbc radio.[49] in 1944, the government in exile signed a treaty with the belgian and dutch governments, creating the benelux economic union and also signed into the bretton woods system.

mexico
mexico declared war on germany in 1942 after german submarines attacked the mexican oil tankers potrero del llano and faja de oro that were transporting crude oil to the united states. these attacks prompted president manuel ávila camacho to declare war on the axis powers.
mexico formed escuadrón 201 fighter squadron as part of the fuerza aérea expedicionaria mexicana (faem—"mexican expeditionary air force"). the squadron was attached to the 58th fighter group of the united states army air forces and carried out tactical air support missions during the liberation of the main philippine island of luzon in the summer of 1945.[50]
some 300,000 mexican citizens went to the united states to work on farms and factories. some 15,000 us nationals of mexican origin and mexican residents in the us enrolled in the us armed forces and fought in various fronts around the world.[51]

netherlands
main article: netherlands in world war ii
the netherlands became an allied member after being invaded on 10 may 1940 by germany. during the ensuing campaign, the netherlands were defeated and occupied by germany. the netherlands was liberated by canadian, british, american and other allied forces during the campaigns of 1944 and 1945. the princess irene brigade, formed from escapees from the german invasion, took part in several actions in 1944 in arromanches and in 1945 in the netherlands. navy vessels saw action in the british channel, the north sea and the mediterranean, generally as part of royal navy units. dutch airmen flying british aircraft participated in the air war over germany.

colonies and dependencies
the dutch east indies (modern-day indonesia) was the principal dutch colony in asia, and was seized by japan in 1942. during the dutch east indies campaign, the netherlands played a significant role in the allied effort to halt the japanese advance as part of the american-british-dutch-australian (abda) command. the abda fleet finally encountered the japanese surface fleet at the battle of java sea, at which doorman gave the order to engage. during the ensuing battle the abda fleet suffered heavy losses, and was mostly destroyed after several naval battles around java; the abda command was later dissolved. the japanese finally occupied the dutch east indies in february–march 1942. dutch troops, aircraft and escaped ships continued to fight on the allied side and also mounted a guerrilla campaign in timor.

new zealand
further information: military history of new zealand during world war ii
new zealand was a sovereign dominion under the new zealand monarchy, as per the statute of westminster 1931. it quickly entered world war ii, officially declaring war on germany on 3 september 1939, just hours after britain.[52] unlike australia, which had felt obligated to declare war, as it also had not ratified the statute of westminster, new zealand did so as a sign of allegiance to britain, and in recognition of britain's abandonment of its former appeasement policy, which new zealand had long opposed. this led to then prime minister michael joseph savage declaring two days later:

with gratitude for the past and confidence in the future we range ourselves without fear beside britain. where she goes, we go; where she stands, we stand. we are only a small and young nation, but we march with a union of hearts and souls to a common destiny.[53]
norway
 norwegian soldiers on the narvik front, may 1940
because of its strategic location for control of the sea lanes in the north sea and the atlantic, both the allies and germany worried about the other side gaining control of the neutral country. germany ultimately struck first with operation weserübung on 9 april 1940, resulting in the two-month-long norwegian campaign, which ended in a german victory and their war-long occupation of norway.
units of the norwegian armed forces evacuated from norway or raised abroad continued participating in the war from exile.
the norwegian merchant fleet, then the fourth largest in the world, was organized into nortraship to support the allied cause. nortraship was the world's largest shipping company, and at its height operated more than 1000 ships.
norway was neutral when germany invaded, and it is not clear when norway became an allied country. great britain, france and polish forces in exile supported norwegian forces against the invaders but without a specific agreement. norway's cabinet signed a military agreement with britain on 28 may 1941. this agreement allowed all norwegian forces in exile to operate under uk command. norwegian troops in exile should primarily be prepared for the liberation of norway, but could also be used to defend britain.[54]

poland
further information: polish contribution to world war ii, polish resistance movement in world war ii, polish armed forces in the west, and polish armed forces in the east
 pilots of the no. 303 "kościuszko" polish fighter squadron during the battle of britain
the invasion of poland on 1 september 1939, started the war in europe, and the united kingdom and france declared war on germany on 3 september. poland fielded the third biggest army[55] among the european allies, after the soviet union and united kingdom, but before france. the country never officially surrendered to the third reich, nor to the soviet union, primarily because neither of the totalitarian powers requested an official surrender, and continued the war effort under the polish government in exile. however, the soviet union unilaterally considered the flight to romania of president ignacy mościcki and marshal edward rydz-śmigły on 17 september as an evidence of debellatio causing the extinction of the polish state, and consequently declared itself allowed to invade (according to the soviet position: "to protect") eastern poland starting from the same day.[56] it must be noted that the red army had invaded the second polish republic several hours before the polish president fled to romania. the soviets invaded on 17 september at 3 a.m.,[57] while president mościcki crossed the polish-romanian border at 21:45 on the same day.[58] the polish military continued to fight, and the last major battle of the war, the battle of kock, ended at 1 a.m. on 6 october 1939 with the independent operational group "polesie," a field army, surrendering due to lack of ammunition.

 polish home army resistance fighters from the "kiliński" battalion during the warsaw uprising (1944)
polish soldiers fought under their own flag but under the command of the british military. they were major contributors to the allies in the theatre of war west of germany and in the theatre of war east of germany, with the soviet union. the polish armed forces in the west created after the fall of poland played minor roles in the battle of france, and important ones in the italian and north african campaigns.[59] the polish people's army took part in the battle of berlin, the closing battle of the european theater of war. they occupied the city alongside the soviet red army.
the home army, the largest underground force in europe, and other resistance organizations in occupied poland provided intelligence that enabled successful operations later in the war and led to uncovering of nazi war crimes (i.e., death camps) to the western allies. notable polish units fought in every campaign in north africa and europe (outside the balkans). the soviet union recognized the london-based government at first. but it broke diplomatic relations after the katyn massacre of polish nationals was revealed. in 1943, the soviet union organized the polish people's army under zygmunt berling, around which it constructed the post-war successor state people's republic of poland.

south africa
further information: military history of south africa during world war ii
south africa was a sovereign dominion under the south african monarchy, as per the statute of westminster 1931. south africa held authority over the mandate of south-west africa.

yugoslavia
main article: world war ii in yugoslavia
 the partisans and the chetniks carried captured germans through užice, autumn 1941.
yugoslavia entered the war on the allied side after the invasion of axis powers on 6 april 1941. the royal yugoslav army was thoroughly defeated in less than two weeks and the country was occupied. the italian-backed croatian fascist leader ante pavelić declared the independent state of croatia before the invasion was over. king peter ii and much of the yugoslavian government had left the country. in the united kingdom, they joined numerous other governments in exile from nazi-occupied europe. beginning with the uprising in herzegovina in june 1941, there was continuous anti-axis resistance in yugoslavia until the end of the war.

resistance factions
 partisan leader marshal josip broz tito with winston churchill in 1944
before the end of 1941, the anti-axis resistance movement split between the royalist chetniks and the communist yugoslav partisans of josip broz tito who fought both against each other during the war and against the occupying forces. the yugoslav partisans managed to put up considerable resistance to the axis occupation, forming various liberated territories during the war. in august 1943, there were over 30 axis divisions on the territory of yugoslavia, not including the forces of the croatian puppet state and other quisling formations.[60] in 1944, the leading allied powers persuaded tito's yugoslav partisans and the royalist yugoslav government led by prime minister ivan šubašić to sign the treaty of vis that created the democratic federal yugoslavia.

partisans
the partisans were a major yugoslav resistance movement against the axis occupation and partition of yugoslavia. initially the partisans were in rivalry with the chetniks over control of the resistance movement. however, the partisans were recognized by both the eastern and western allies as the primary resistance movement in 1943. after that, their strength increased rapidly, from 100,000 at the beginning of 1943 to over 648,000 in september 1944. in 1945 they were transformed into the yugoslav army, organized in 4 field armies with 800,000[61] fighters.

chetniks
 chetniks leader general mihailovic with the members of the us military mission, operation halyard 1944
the chetniks, the short name given to the movement titled the yugoslav army of the fatherland, were initially a major allied yugoslav resistance movement. however, due to their royalist and anti-communist views, chetniks were considered to have begun collaborating with the axis as a tactical move to focus on destroying their partisan rivals. the chetniks presented themselves as a yugoslav movement, but were primarily a serb movement. they reached their peak in 1943 with 93,000 fighters.[62] their major contribution was operation halyard in 1944. in collaboration with the oss, 413 allied airmen shot down over yugoslavia were rescued and evacuated.

client states
british
egypt
main article: military history of egypt during world war ii
the united kingdom controlled egypt and used it as a major base for allied operations throughout the region, especially the battles in north africa against italy and germany. its highest priorities were control of the eastern mediterranean, and especially keeping the suez canal open for merchant ships and for military connections with india and australia.[63]
the kingdom of egypt was nominally an independent state since 1922 but effectively remained in the british sphere of influence with the british mediterranean fleet being stationed in alexandria and british army forces being stationed in the suez canal zone. egypt faced an axis campaign led by italian and german forces during the war. british frustration over king farouk's reign over egypt resulted in the abdeen palace incident of 1942 where british army forces surrounded the royal abdeen palace and demanded a new government be established, nearly forcing the abdication of farouk until he submitted to british demands. the kingdom of egypt joined the united nations on 24 february 1945.[64]

india (british raj)
further information: india in world war ii
at the outbreak of world war ii, the indian army numbered 205,000 men. later during world war ii the indian army became the largest all-volunteer force in history, rising to over 2.5 million men in size.[10] these forces included tank, artillery and airborne forces. indian soldiers earned 30 victoria crosses during the second world war. during the war india suffered 1,500,000 civilian casualties (more than the united kingdom), mainly from the bengal famine of 1943 and 87,000 military casualties, more than any crown colony but fewer than the united kingdom, which suffered 382,000 military casualties.

iran
further information: anglo-soviet invasion of iran
this section is empty. you can help by adding to it. (july 2014)
iraq
further information: anglo-iraqi war
this section is empty. you can help by adding to it. (july 2014)
soviet
bulgaria
main article: military history of bulgaria during world war ii
after a period of neutrality, bulgaria joined the axis powers from 1941 to 1944. the orthodox church and others convinced king boris to not allow the bulgarian jews to be exported to concentration camps. the king died shortly afterwards, suspected of being poisoned after a visit to germany. bulgaria abandoned the axis and joined the allies when the soviet union invaded, offering no resistance to the incoming forces. in the 1947 peace treaties, bulgaria gained a small area near the black sea from romania, making it the only former german ally to gain territory from wwii.

mongolia
main article: mongolia in world war ii
mongolia fought against japan during the battles of khalkhin gol in 1939 and the soviet–japanese war in august 1945 to protect its independence and to liberate southern mongolia from japan and china. mongolia had been a soviet sphere of influence since the 1920s.

poland
main article: polish armed forces in the east
by 1944, poland entered the soviet sphere of influence with the establishment of władysław gomułka's communist regime. polish forces fought alongside soviet forces against germany.

romania
main articles: romania in world war ii and king michael's coup
 romanian soldiers in transylvania, september–october 1944
romania had initially been a member of the axis powers but switched allegiance upon facing invasion by the soviet union. in a radio broadcast to the romanian people and army on the night of 23 august 1944 king michael issued a cease-fire,[65] proclaimed romania's loyalty to the allies, announced the acceptance of an armistice (to be signed on 12 september)[66] offered by the soviet union, the united kingdom, the united states, and declared war on germany.[67] the coup accelerated the red army's advance into romania, but did not avert a rapid soviet occupation and capture of about 130,000 romanian soldiers, who were transported to the soviet union where many perished in prison camps. the armistice was signed three weeks later on 12 september 1944, on terms virtually dictated by the soviet union.[65] under the terms of the armistice, romania announced its unconditional surrender[68] to the ussr and was placed under occupation of the allied forces with the soviet union as their representative, in control of the media, communication, post, and civil administration behind the front.[65]

tannu tuva
tannu tuva was a partially recognized state founded from the former tuvan protectorate of imperial russia. it was a client state of the soviet union and was annexed into the soviet union in 1944.

co-belligerent state combatants
italy
further information: italian civil war, italian co-belligerent army, and italian resistance movement
 the dead bodies of benito mussolini, his mistress clara petacci, and several fascist leaders, hanging for public display after they were executed by italian partisans in 1945
italy initially had been a leading member of the axis powers, however after facing multiple military losses including the loss of all of italy's colonies to advancing allied forces, duce benito mussolini was deposed and arrested in july 1943 by order of king victor emmanuel iii of italy in co-operation with members of the grand council of fascism who viewed mussolini as having led italy to ruin by allying with germany in the war. victor emmanuel iii dismantled the remaining apparatus of the fascist regime and appointed field marshal pietro badoglio as prime minister of italy. on 8 september 1943, italy signed the armistice of cassibile with the allies, ending italy's war with the allies and ending italy's participation with the axis powers. expecting immediate german retaliation, victor emmanuel iii and the italian government relocated to southern italy under allied control. germany viewed the italian government's actions as an act of betrayal, and german forces immediately occupied all italian territories outside of allied control,[69] in some cases even massacring italian troops.
italy became a co-belligerent of the allies, and the italian co-belligerent army was created to fight against the german occupation of northern italy, where german paratroopers rescued mussolini from arrest and he was placed in charge of a german puppet state known as the italian social republic (rsi). italy descended into civil war until the end of hostilities after his deposition and arrest, with fascists loyal to him allying with german forces and helping them against the italian armistice government and partisans.[70]

associated power
albania
albania was recognized as an "associated power" at the 1946 paris conference[71] and officially signed the treaty ending wwii between the "allied and associated powers" and italy in paris, on 10 february 1947.[72][73]

self-proclaimed allies
provisional government of the republic of korea
further information: provisional government of the republic of korea and korean liberation army
the provisional government of the republic of korea was established on april 13, 1919. during the time when the provisional government was created, korea was under japanese rule. the provisional government had governmental tasks and created important organizations for their independence movement, such as the korean liberation army (kla) on september 17, 1940. the provisional government also declared war against the empire of japan on december 10, 1941. the provisional government is also the first democratic government of korea.
the kla participated in the battles ongoing in china with the kuomintang forces. in 1943, kla underground activists, cooperating with british forces in burma and india, initiated joint operations with british forces.
the kla failed to initiate operation eagle, a plan to liberate the korean peninsula by first attacking the capital region (seoul and incheon), on august 18, 1945. the office of strategic services of the united states also promised to assist the kla with warplanes, submarines, and airborne troops during the operation. however, the plan failed due to the early surrender of japan on august 15, 1945. the provisional government also faced heavy opposition from the united states army military government in korea after world war ii. in addition, other governments in the treaty of san francisco did not recognize the provisional government as a member of the allies. the government of the republic of korea was established on august 15, 1948, under president syngman rhee, and the provisional government was disbanded officially.

united nations
declaration by united nations
 wartime poster for the united nations, created in 1941 by the us office of war information
the alliance was formalised in the declaration by united nations on 1 january 1942. there were 26 signatories:


australia
belgium
canada
china
costa rica
cuba
czechoslovakia
dominican republic
el salvador
greece
guatemala
haiti
honduras
india
luxembourg
netherlands
new zealand
nicaragua
norway
panama
poland
soviet union
south africa
united kingdom
united states
yugoslavia

alliance growing
 wartime poster for the united nations, created in 1943 by the us office of war information
the united nations began growing immediately after their formation. in 1942, mexico, the philippines and ethiopia adhered to the declaration. the african nation had been restored in its independence by british forces after the italian defeat on amba alagi in 1941, while the philippines, still dependent on washington but granted international diplomatic recognition, was allowed to join on 10 june despite their occupation by japan.
during 1943, the declaration was signed by iraq, iran, brazil, bolivia and colombia. a tripartite treaty of alliance with britain and the ussr formalised iran's assistance to the allies.[74] in rio de janeiro, brazilian dictator getúlio vargas was considered near to fascist ideas, but realistically joined the united nations after their evident successes.
in 1944, liberia and france signed. the french situation was very confused. free french forces were recognized only by britain, while the united states considered vichy france to be the legal government of the country until operation overlord, while also preparing us occupation francs. winston churchill urged roosevelt to restore france to its status of a major power after the liberation of paris in august 1944; the prime minister feared that after the war, britain could remain the sole great power in europe facing the communist threat, as it was in 1940 and 1941 against nazism.
during the early part of 1945, peru, chile, paraguay, venezuela, uruguay, turkey, egypt, saudi arabia, lebanon, syria (these latter two french colonies had been declared independent nations by british occupation troops, despite big protests by pétain before, and de gaulle after) and ecuador became signatories. ukraine and belarus, which were not independent nations but parts of the soviet union, were accepted as members of the united nations as way to provide greater influence to stalin, who had only yugoslavia as a communist partner in the alliance.

charter of the united nations
main article: charter of the united nations
 the first version of the flag of the united nations, introduced in april 1945
the charter of the united nations was agreed to during the war at the united nations conference on international organization, held between april and july 1945. the charter was signed by 50 nations on 26 june (poland had its place reserved and later became the 51st "original" signatory),[citation needed] and was formally ratified shortly after the war on 24 october 1945. in 1944, the united nations was formulated and negotiated among the delegations from the soviet union, the united kingdom, the united states and china at the dumbarton oaks conference[75][76] where the formation and the permanent seats (for the "big five", china, france, the uk, us, and ussr) of the united nations security council were decided. the security council met for the first time in the immediate aftermath of war on 17 january 1946.[77]
these are the original 51 signatories (unsc permanent members are asterisked):




argentine republic
commonwealth of australia
kingdom of belgium
republic of bolivia
united states of brazil
byelorussian soviet socialist republic
dominion of canada
republic of chile
republic of china*
republic of colombia
republic of costa rica
republic of cuba
czechoslovak republic
kingdom of denmark
dominican republic
republic of ecuador
kingdom of egypt
republic of el salvador
ethiopian empire
french republic*
kingdom of greece
republic of guatemala
republic of haiti
republic of honduras
indian empire




imperial kingdom of iran
kingdom of iraq
lebanese republic
republic of liberia
grand duchy of luxembourg
united mexican states
kingdom of the netherlands
dominion of new zealand
republic of nicaragua
kingdom of norway
republic of panama
republic of paraguay
republic of peru
commonwealth of the philippines
republic of poland
kingdom of saudi arabia
union of south africa
syrian republic
republic of turkey
ukrainian soviet socialist republic
union of soviet socialist republics*
united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland*
united states of america*
oriental republic of uruguay
united states of venezuela
democratic federal yugoslavia



timeline of allied nations entering the war
main article: declarations of war during world war ii
the following list denotes dates on which nations declared war on the axis powers, or on which an axis power declared war on them. nepal was formally independent.[citation needed] the indian empire had a status less independent than the dominions.[78]

 a british poster from 1941, promoting the greater alliance against germany
1939
poland: 1 september 1939[79]
france: 3 september 1939[80]—on 22 june 1940, vichy france under marshal pétain formally capitulated to germany, and became neutral. this capitulation was denounced by general de gaulle, who established the free france government-in-exile, which continued to fight against germany. this led to the provisional government of the french republic, which was officially recognized by the other allies as the legitimate government of france on 23 october 1944.[81] pétain's 1940 surrender was also legally nullified, so france is considered an ally throughout the war.[82]
united kingdom: 3 september 1939[80]
india: 3 september 1939[83][84]
australia: 3 september 1939[83][85]
new zealand: 3 september 1939[83][86]
nepal: 4 september 1939[87]
south africa: 6 september 1939[64]
canada: 10 september 1939[64]
1940
norway: 8 april 1940[64]—german invasion of a neutral country without declaration of war. the allies supported norway during the norwegian campaign. norway did not officially join the allies until later.[54][88]
denmark 9 april 1940—german invasion without declaration of war[citation needed]
belgium: 10 may 1940[citation needed]
luxembourg: 10 may 1940[citation needed]
netherlands: 10 may 1940[citation needed]
greece: 28 october 1940[citation needed]
1941
yugoslavia: 6 april 1941 (yugoslavia signed the tripartite pact, becoming a nominal member of the axis on 25 march; but was attacked by the axis on 6 april 1941.)[89]
 u.s. government poster showing a friendly soviet soldier, 1942
soviet union: 22 june 1941;[citation needed] despite membership of the soviet union, ukraine and belarus were recognized as separate fighting states by the united kingdom and the united states at the end of the war.[citation needed]
panama: 7 december 1941[citation needed]
united states: december 1941 (war declared on japan)[90]
philippines: 8 december 1941[91]
costa rica: 8 december 1941[64]
dominican republic: 8 december 1941[64]
el salvador: 8 december 1941[64]
haiti: 8 december 1941[64]
honduras: 8 december 1941[64]
nicaragua: 8 december 1941[64]
china: 9 december 1941[64] (at war with japan since 1937)[92]
cuba: 9 december 1941[64]
guatemala: 9 december 1941[64]
united states: 11 december 1941 (war declared on the u.s. by germany and italy)[64]
provisional governments or governments-in exile that declared war against the axis in 1941
vietnam (viet minh): 7 december 1941
provisional government of the republic of korea: 10 december 1941[93]
czechoslovakia (government-in-exile): 16 december 1941[64][94]
1942
peru: february 1942
mexico: 22 may 1942[64]
brazil: 22 august 1942[64]
ethiopia: 14 december 1942[64]
1943
iraq: 16 january 1943[64]
bolivia: 7 april 1943[citation needed]
colombia: 26 july 1943[citation needed]
iran: 9 september 1943[64]
italy: 10 october 1943[64]—former axis power
1944
liberia: 27 january 1944[64]
romania: 25 august 1944[64]—former axis power
bulgaria: 8 september 1944[95]—former axis power
1945
hungary: 20 january 1945[64]—former axis power
ecuador: 2 february 1945[citation needed]
paraguay: 7 february 1945[64]
uruguay: 15 february 1945[citation needed]
venezuela: 15 february 1945[citation needed]
turkey: 23 february 1945[64]
egypt: 24 february 1945[64]
syria: 26 february 1945[64]
lebanon: 27 february 1945[64]
saudi arabia: 1 march 1945[64]
finland: 3 march 1945[64]—former co-belligerent of germany in the continuation war. on 3 march 1945, finland retroactively declared war on germany from 15 september 1944.
argentina: 27 march 1945[96]
chile: 11 april 1945 declared war on japan[64]
mongolia: august 1945 declared war on japan


allies of world war ii – declaration by united nations and treaty of san francisco


country
declaration by united nations
treaty of san francisco


 argentina




 australia
 1942



 belgium
 1942



 bolivia
 1943



 brazil
 1943



 cambodia




 canada
 1942



 ceylon




 chile
 1945



 china
 1942



 colombia
 1943



 costa rica
 1942



 cuba
 1942



 czechoslovakia
 1942



 dominican republic
 1942



 ecuador
 1945



 egypt
 1945



 el salvador
 1942



 ethiopia
 1942



 france
 1944



 greece
 1942



 guatemala
 1942



 haiti
 1942



 honduras
 1942



 india (uk-appointed administration, 1858–1947)
 1942



 indonesia




 iran
 1943



 iraq
 1943



 laos




 lebanon
 1945



 liberia
 1944



 luxembourg
 1942



 mexico
 1942



 netherlands
 1942



 new zealand
 1942



 nicaragua
 1942



 norway
 1942



 pakistan




 panama
 1942



 paraguay
 1945



 peru
 1945



 philippines
 1942



 poland
 1942



 saudi arabia
 1945



 south africa
 1942



 soviet union
 1942



 syria
 1945



 turkey
 1945



 united kingdom
 1942



 united states
 1942



 uruguay
 1945



 venezuela
 1945



 yugoslavia
 1942



 vietnam




see also


world war ii portal
war portal
history portal
allies of world war i
diplomatic history of world war ii
free world (world war ii)
military production during world war ii
neutral powers during world war ii
participants in world war ii
footnotes


^ davies 2006, pp 150–151.

^ a b doenecke, justus d.; stoler, mark a. (2005). debating franklin d. roosevelt's foreign policies, 1933–1945. rowman & littlefield. isbn 9780847694167..mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/65/lock-green.svg/9px-lock-green.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d6/lock-gray-alt-2.svg/9px-lock-gray-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/aa/lock-red-alt-2.svg/9px-lock-red-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration{color:#555}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration span{border-bottom:1px dotted;cursor:help}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/wikisource-logo.svg/12px-wikisource-logo.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output code.cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:inherit;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#33aa33;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-right{padding-right:0.2em}

^ hoopes, townsend, and douglas brinkley. fdr and the creation of the u.n. (yale university press, 1997)

^ ian c. b. dear and michael foot, eds. the oxford companion to world war ii (2005), pp 29, 1176

^ ward, geoffrey c.; burns, ken (2014). "nothing to conceal". the roosevelts: an intimate history. knopf doubleday publishing group. isbn 0385353065.

^ "united nations". wordorigins.org. 3 february 2007. retrieved 28 march 2016.

^ douglas brinkley, fdr & the making of the u.n.

^ churchill, winston s. (1981) [1953]. the second world war, volume vi: triumph and tragedy. houghton-mifflin company. p. 561.

^ wood, j r t (june 2005). so far and no further! rhodesia's bid for independence during the retreat from empire 1959–1965. victoria, british columbia: trafford publishing. pp. 8–9. isbn 978-1-4120-4952-8.

^ a b c g. bruce strang. on the fiery march: mussolini prepares for war. westport, connecticut, us: greenwood publishing group, inc., 2003. pp. 58–59.

^ g. bruce strang. on the fiery march: mussolini prepares for war. westport, connecticut, us: greenwood publishing group, inc., 2003. pp. 59–60.

^ euan graham. japan's sea lane security, 1940–2004: a matter of life and death? oxon, england, uk; new york, new york, us: routledge, 2006. pp. 77.

^ a b guo wu yuan. xin wen ban gong shi. col. c.l. chennault and flying tigers. english translation. state council information office of the people's republic of china. pp. 16.

^ a b c d e frederic j. fleron, erik p. hoffmann, robbin frederick laird. soviet foreign policy: classic and contemporary issues. third paperback edition. new brunswick, new jersey, us: transaction publishers, 2009. pp. 236.

^ a b dieter heinzig. the soviet union and communist china, 1945–1950: the arduous road to the alliance. m.e. sharpe, 2004. pp. 9.

^ "crisis". time. 13 november 1944.

^ dieter heinzig. the soviet union and communist china, 1945–1950: the arduous road to the alliance. m.e. sharpe, 2004. pp. 79.

^ a b speeches that reshaped the world.

^ "when the us wanted to take over france‑le monde diplomatique‑english edition". le monde diplomatique. may 2003. retrieved 10 december 2010.

^ helen rapport. joseph stalin: a biographical companion. santa barbara, california, us: abc-clio, 1999. p. 104.

^ a b c paul bushkovitch. a concise history of russia. cambridge, england, uk; new york, new york, us: cambridge university press, 2012. p. 390–391.

^ the soviet union and communist china, 1945–1950: the road to alliance. p. 78.

^ kees boterbloem. a history of russia and its empire: from mikhail romanov to vladimir putin. p235.

^ a b david l. ransel, bozena shallcross. polish encounters, russian identity. indiana university press, 2005. p184.

^ jan karski. the great powers and poland: from versailles to yalta. rowman & littlefield, 2014. p197.

^ david l. ransel, bozena shallcross. polish encounters, russian identity. indiana university press, 2005, p. 184.

^ overy 1997, pp 41, 43–47.

^ davies 2006, pp 148–51.

^ davies 2006, pp 16, 154.

^ khudoley, konstantin k. (2009). "the baltic factor".  in hiden, john. the baltic question during the cold war. vahur made, david j. smith. psychology press. p. 57. isbn 978-0-415-37100-1.

^ geoffrey, roberts (2004). "ideology, calculation, and improvisation. sphere of influence and soviet foreign policy 1939–1945".  in martel, gordon. the world war two reader. routledge. p. 88. isbn 978-0-415-22402-4.

^ roberts, geoffrey (1995). "soviet policy and the baltic states, 1939–1940 a reappraisal". diplomacy & statecraft. francis & taylor. 6 (3): 672–700. doi:10.1080/09592299508405982.

^ toomas alatalu. tuva. a state reawakens. soviet studies, vol. 44, no. 5 (1992), pp. 881–895

^ freidel, frank (2009). franklin d. roosevelt: a rendezvous with destiny. p. 350. isbn 9780316092418.

^ jonathan g. utley (2005). going to war with japan, 1937–1941. fordham univ press. isbn 9780823224722.

^ chris henry. the battle of the coral sea. london, england, uk: compendium publishing; annapolis, maryland, us: naval institute press, 2003. p. 84.

^ keegan, john. "the second world war." new york: penguin, 2005. (275)

^ mckeown, deirdre; jordan, roy (2010). "parliamentary involvement in declaring war and deploying forces overseas" (pdf). parliamentary library. parliament of australia. pp. 4, 8–11. retrieved 9 december 2015.

^ phillip alfred buckner (2008). canada and the british empire. oxford u.p. pp. 105–6. isbn 9780199271641.

^ "second world war and the cuban air force". retrieved 2013-02-06.

^ polmar, norman; thomas b. allen. world war ii: the encyclopedia of the war years 1941–1945.

^ morison, samuel eliot (2002). history of united states naval operations in world war ii: the atlantic. university of illinois press. isbn 0-252-07061-5.

^ "cubans sunk a german submarine in wwii". cubanow. archived from the original on 20 december 2014. retrieved 6 february 2013.

^ "german jewish refugees, 1933–1939". www.ushmm.org. retrieved 1 june 2017.

^ sang, mu-kien adriana (16 november 2012). "judíos en el caribe. la comunidad judía en sosúa (2)" (in spanish). el caribe. archived from the original on 29 may 2014. retrieved 29 may 2014.

^ "dominican republic as haven for jewish refugees". www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org. retrieved 1 june 2017.

^ lajara solá, homero luis (24 july 2012). "el heroe de la batalla del caribe". listín dairio. retrieved 10 may 2018.

^ "embajada de los estados unidos y el museo memorial de la resistencia abren exposición en honor a veteranos dominicanos de la segunda guerra mundial".

^ various (2011). les gouvernements du grand-duché de luxembourg depuis 1848 (pdf). luxembourg: government of luxembourg. p. 112. isbn 978-2-87999-212-9. archived from the original (pdf) on 16 october 2011.

^ klemen, l. "201st mexican fighter squadron". the netherlands east indies 1941–1942.201st mexican fighter squadron

^ plascencia de la parra, e. la infantería invisible:mexicanos en la segunda guerra mundial.méxico. ed. unam. retrieved 27 april 2012 [1]

^ "fighting for britain – nz and the second world war". ministry for culture and heritage. 2 september 2008.

^ "pm declares nz's support for britain – nzhistory, new zealand history online". 26 november 2014. archived from the original on 26 november 2014.

^ a b skodvin, magne (red.) (1984): norge i krig. bind 7. oslo: aschehoug.

^ "military contribution of poland to world war ii – wojsko polskie – departament wychowania i promocji obronności". wojsko-polskie.pl. archived from the original on 6 june 2009. retrieved 15 may 2010.

^ molotov declaration of 17 september 1939

^ "73. rocznica sowieckiej napaści na polskę". rmf24.pl. 17 september 2012.

^ "prezydent ignacy mościcki cz 3 prof. dr hab. andrzej garlicki uniwersytet warszawski". archived from the original on 5 january 2009. retrieved 2013-01-31.cs1 maint: bot: original-url status unknown (link).

^ at the siege of tobruk

^ "basil davidson: partisan picture". retrieved 2014-07-11.

^ perica, vjekoslav (2004). balkan idols: religion and nationalism in yugoslav states. oxford university press. p. 96. isbn 0-19-517429-1.

^ borković, milan (1979). kontrarevolucija u srbiji – kvislinška uprava 1941–1944 (volume 1, in serbo-croatian). sloboda. p. 9.

^ steve morewood,  the british defence of egypt, 1935–40: conflict and crisis in the eastern mediterranean (2008).

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa ab ac ad ae af martin, chris (2011). world war ii: the book of lists. stroud: the history press. pp. 8–11. isbn 978-0-7524-6704-7.

^ a b c "romania – armistice negotiations and soviet occupation". countrystudies.us.

^ (in romanian) delia radu, "serialul 'ion antonescu şi asumarea istoriei' (3)", bbc romanian edition, 1 august 2008

^ (in romanian) "dictatura+a+luat+sfarsit+si+cu+ea+inceteaza+toate+asupririle" "the dictatorship has ended and along with it all oppression" – from the proclamation to the nation of king michael i on the night of august 23 1944 archived 2 december 2013 at the wayback machine, curierul naţional, 7 august 2004

^ "king proclaims nation's surrender and wish to help allies", the new york times, 24 august 1944

^ josef becker; franz knipping (1986). great britain, france, italy and germany in a postwar world, 1945–1950. walter de gruyter. pp. 506–7. isbn 9783110863918.

^ morgan, philip (2007). the fall of mussolini: italy, the italians, and the second world war. oxford up. pp. 194–85. isbn 9780191578755.

^ united states department of state, foreign relations of the united states, 1946. paris peace conference : documents (1946), page 802, article 26.a 'memoranda submitted by albanian government on the draft peace treaty with italy' "proposed amendment...for the purposes of this treaty, albania shall be considered as an associated power.", web http://images.library.wisc.edu/frus/efacs/1946v04/reference/frus.frus1946v04.i0011.pdf

^ treaties in force, a list of treaties and other international agreements of the united states in force on january 1, 2013, page 453, accessible online from http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/218912.pdf

^ axelrod, john (5 february 2015). encyclopedia of world war ii. volume 1. h w fowler. p. 824. isbn 978-1-84511-308-7. the first peace treaty concluded between the allies and a former axis nation was with italy . it was signed in paris on february 10, by representatives from  albania, australia ....

^ motter, t.h. vail (2000) [1952]. "chapter i: experiment in co-operation". the persion corridor and aid to russia. united states army in world war ii. united states army center of military history. cmh pub 8-1. archived from the original on 5 may 2010. retrieved 15 may 2010.

^ bohlen, c.e. (1973). witness to history, 1929–1969. new york. p. 159.

^ video: allies study post-war security etc. (1944). universal newsreel. 1944. retrieved 28 november 2014.

^ united nations security council: official records: first year, first series, first meeting

^ ian dear, ian. and m.r.d. foot, eds., the oxford companion to world war ii (1995)

^ weinberg, gerhard l. (2005) a world at arms: a global history of world war ii (2nd ed.). cambridge university press. pp. 6.

^ a b "1939: britain and france declare war on germany". bbc. retrieved 17 february 2015.

^ "ordre de la libération". ordredelaliberation.fr. archived from the original on 4 july 2009.

^ "ordonnance du 9 août 1944 relative au rétablissement de la légalité républicaine sur le territoire continental. – legifrance". legifrance.gouv.fr.

^ a b c connelly, mark (2012). the ira on film and television: a history. mcfarland. p. 68. isbn 978-0-7864-8961-9.

^ weinberg, gerhard l. (2005). a world at arms: a global history of world war ii. cambridge university press. p. 65. isbn 978-0-521-61826-7.

^ morgan, kenneth (2012). australia: a very short introduction. oxford: oxford university press. p. 89. isbn 978-0-19-958993-7.

^ new zealand declares war on germany, ministry for culture and heritage, updated 14-oct-2014

^ selley, ron; cocks, kerrin (2014). i won't be home next summer: flight lieutenant r.n. selley dfc (1917ð1941). pinetown: 30 degrees south publishers. p. 89. isbn 978-1-928211-19-8.

^ tamelander, m. og n. zetterling (2001): 9. april. oslo: spartacus.

^ sotirović, vladislav b. (18 december 2011). "кнез павле карађорђевић и приступање југославије тројном пакту". nspm. (in serbian)"

^ kluckhohn, frank l. (8 december 1941). "u.s. declares war, pacific battle widens". the new york times: 1.

^ dear and foot, oxford companion to world war ii pp 878–9

^ rana mitter. "forgotten ally? china's unsung role in world war ii". cnn.

^ a. wigfall green (2007). the epic of korea. read books. p. 6. isbn 1-4067-0320-6.

^ dear and foot, oxford companion to world war ii pp 279-80

^ a political chronology of europe, psychology press, 2001, p.45

^ decree 6945/45


bibliography
davies, norman (2006), europe at war 1939–1945: no simple victory. london: macmillan. isbn 0-333-69285-3
dear, ian c. b. and michael foot, eds. the oxford companion to world war ii (2005), comprehensive encyclopedia for all countries
holland r. (1981), britain and the commonwealth alliance, 1918–1939, london: macmillan. isbn 978-0-333-27295-4
overy, richard (1997), russia's war: a history of the soviet effort: 1941–1945. new york: penguin. isbn 0-14-027169-4.
weinberg, gerhard l. (1994). a world at arms: a global history of world war ii. comprehensive coverage of the war with emphasis on diplomacy excerpt and text search
further reading
ready, j. lee (2012) [1985]. forgotten allies: the military contribution of the colonies, exiled governments, and lesser powers to the allied victory in world war ii. jefferson, n.c.: mcfarland & company. isbn 9780899501178. oclc 586670908.
external links
the atlantic conference: resolution of 24 september 1941
vtehistory of world war ii by region and countryafrica
belgian congo
british somaliland
egypt
french west africa
french somaliland
gold coast
kenya
liberia
nyasaland
madagascar
south africa
southern rhodesia
north africa
tunisia
north america
canada
cuba
el salvador
greenland
mexico
newfoundland
panama
united states
arizona
nevada
new mexico
puerto rico
south america
argentina
brazil
british guiana
colombia
latin america
uruguay
venezuela
asia
burma
ceylon
china
manchuria
dutch east indies
hong kong
india
indochina
iran
iraq
japan
malaya
mongolia
nepal
philippines
sarawak, brunei, labuan, and british north borneo
singapore
thailand
turkey
tuva
europe
albania
austria
belgium
bulgaria
czechoslovakia
denmark
estonia
finland
france
basque country
germany
greece
hungary
iceland
ireland
italy
latvia
liechtenstein
lithuania
luxembourg
netherlands
norway
poland
portugal
romania
slovakia
slovenia
soviet union
azerbaijan
belarus
ukraine
spain
galicia
sweden
switzerland
united kingdom
british empire
channel islands
gibraltar
vatican city
yugoslavia
oceania
australia
nauru
new zealand

vte united nations
antónio guterres, secretary-general
amina j. mohammed, deputy secretary-general
maría fernanda espinosa, general assembly president
united nations systemunited nations charter
preamble
principal organs
secretariat
secretary-general
deputy secretary-general
under-secretary-general
general assembly
president
international court of justice
security council
members
economic and social council
statute
trusteeship council
secretariat officesand departments
headquarters
envoy on youth
spokesperson for the secretary-general
geneva
palace of nations
nairobi
vienna
economic and social affairs
political affairs
public information
dag hammarskjöld library
safety and security
palestinian rights
peacekeeping operations
internal oversight
legal affairs
developing countries
sport for development and peace
disarmament affairs
outer space affairs
partnerships
coordination of humanitarian affairs
un organizations by location
united nations office for developing countries
sexual violence in conflict
programmes andspecialized agencies
culture of peace
fao
icao
ifad
ilo
imo
itc
ipcc
iaea
minurso
unido
itu
unaids
scsl
unctad
uncitral
uncdf
undg
undp
undpi
undpko
peacekeeping
unep
ozonaction
unep/grid-arendal
unep-wcmc
unesco
unfip
unfpa
un-habitat
ohchr
unhcr
unhrc
unicef
unicri
unidir
unitar
un-oceans
unodc
unops
unosat
unrisd
unrwa
unssc
unu
unu-op
unu-cris
unv
un women
unwto
upu
wfp
who
wipo
wmo
members and observers
full members
founding members
unsc permanent members
observers
european union
history
league of nations
four policemen
declaration by united nations
peacekeeping missions
history
timeline
enlargement
resolutions
security council vetoes
general assembly
66th
67th
security council
cyprus
iran
iraq
israel
lebanon
nagorno-karabakh
north korea
palestine
syria
western sahara
elections
secretary-general (2016)
international court of justice 2011
general assembly president (2016)
security council (2016)
related
bretton woods system
comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty
criticism
delivering as one
flag
honour flag
four nations initiative
genocide convention
un global compact
international covenant on civil and political rights
international criminal court
international decade for a culture of peace and non-violence for the children of the world
international years
interpreters
un laissez-passer
military staff committee
official languages
organisation for the prohibition of chemical weapons
peacekeeping
ralph bunche park
united nations postal administration
standard minimum rules for the administration of juvenile justice
standard minimum rules for the treatment of prisoners (the mandela rules)
treaty series
un day
universal declaration of human rights
millennium declaration
summit
development goals
security council veto power
un reform
security council reform
un art collection
un federal credit union
un memorial cemetery korea
vienna declaration and programme of action
world federation of united nations associations
other
outline
un television film series (1964–1966)
in popular culture

vteworld war ii
asia and the pacific
china
south-east asia
north and central pacific
south-west pacific
europe
western
eastern
mediterranean and middle east
north africa
east africa
italy
west africa
atlantic
north america
south america
casualties
military engagements
conferences
commanders
participantsallies.mw-parser-output .nobold{font-weight:normal}(leaders)
australia
belgium
brazil
canada
china
cuba
czechoslovakia
denmark
ethiopia
france
free france (from june 1940)
greece
india
italy (from september 1943)
luxembourg
mexico
netherlands
new zealand
norway
philippines (commonwealth)
poland
south africa
southern rhodesia
soviet union
tuva
united kingdom
united states
puerto rico
yugoslavia
axis andaxis-aligned(leaders)
albania
bulgaria
reorganized national government of the republic of china
independent state of croatia
finland
germany
hungary
free india
iraq
italy (until september 1943)
italian social republic
japan
manchukuo
philippines (second republic)
romania
slovakia
thailand
vichy france
armed neutrality
resistance
albania
austria
belgium
bulgaria
czech lands
denmark
estonia
ethiopia
france
germany
greece
hong kong
italy
japan
jewish
korea
latvia
lithuania
luxembourg
malaya
netherlands
northeast china
norway
philippines
poland
anti-communist
romania
thailand
soviet union
slovakia
western ukraine
vietnam
yugoslavia
monarchists
timelineprelude
africa
asia
europe
1939
poland
phoney war
winter war
atlantic
changsha
china
1940
weserübung
netherlands
belgium
france
armistice of 22 june 1940
britain
north africa
west africa
british somaliland
north china
baltic states
moldova
indochina
greece
compass
1941
east africa
yugoslavia
shanggao
greece
crete
iraq
soviet union (barbarossa)
finland
lithuania
syria and lebanon
kiev
iran
leningrad
gorky
moscow
sevastopol
pearl harbor
the outbreak of the pacific war
hong kong
philippines
changsha
malaya
borneo (1941–42)
1942
burma
changsha
java sea
coral sea
gazala
dutch harbor
 attu (occupation)
kiska
zhejiang-jiangxi
midway
rzhev
blue
stalingrad
singapore
dieppe
el alamein
guadalcanal
torch
1943
tunisia
kursk
smolensk
gorky
solomon islands
 attu
sicily
 cottage
lower dnieper
italy
armistice of cassibile
gilbert and marshall islands
 burma
 northern burma and western yunnan
changde
1944
monte cassino / shingle
narva
korsun–cherkassy
tempest
ichi-go
overlord (battle of normandy - d-day)
neptune
normandy
mariana and palau
bagration
western ukraine
tannenberg line
warsaw
eastern romania
belgrade
paris
dragoon
gothic line
market garden
estonia
crossbow
pointblank
lapland
hungary
leyte
ardennes
bodenplatte
philippines (1944–1945)
burma (1944–45)
1945
vistula–oder
iwo jima
western invasion of germany
okinawa
italy (spring 1945)
borneo
syrmian front
berlin
czechoslovakia
budapest
west hunan
guangxi
surrender of germany
project hula
manchuria
manila
borneo
taipei
atomic bombings
debate
kuril islands
shumshu
surrender of japan
end of world war ii in asia
aspectsgeneralfamines
bengal famine of 1943
chinese famine of 1942–43
greek famine of 1941-1944
dutch famine of 1944–45
vietnamese famine of 1945

air warfare of world war ii
blitzkrieg
comparative military ranks
cryptography
diplomacy
home front
united states
australian
united kingdom
lend-lease
manhattan project
military awards
military equipment
military production
nazi plunder
opposition
technology
allied cooperation
total war
strategic bombing
puppet states
women
art and world war ii
aftermath
expulsion of germans
operation paperclip
operation osoaviakhim
operation keelhaul
occupation of germany
territorial changes of germany
soviet occupations
romania
poland
hungary
baltic states
occupation of japan
first indochina war
indonesian national revolution
cold war
decolonization
treaty on the final settlement with respect to germany
popular culture
war crimes
allied war crimes
soviet war crimes
british war crimes
united states war crimes
german (forced labour) / wehrmacht war crimes
holocaust
aftermath
response
prosecution
italian war crimes
japanese war crimes
unit 731
prosecution
croatian war crimes
against the serbs
against the jews
romanian war crimes
wartimesexual violence
german military brothels
camp brothels
rape during the occupation of japan
sook ching
comfort women
rape of nanking
rape of manila
rape during the occupation of germany
rape during the liberation of france
rape during the soviet occupation of poland
prisoners
finnish prisoners of war in the soviet union
german prisoners of war in the soviet union
german prisoners of war in the united states
italian prisoners of war in the soviet union
japanese prisoners of war in the soviet union
japanese prisoners of war in world war ii
german mistreatment of soviet prisoners of war
polish prisoners of war in the soviet union
romanian prisoners of war in the soviet union
soviet prisoners of war in finland

bibliography
category
portal

authority control 
gnd: 4001297-9
nkc: ko2018978948




 
						retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=allies_of_world_war_ii&oldid=883589225"					
categories: 20th-century military alliancesmilitary alliances involving canadamilitary alliances involving the united kingdommilitary alliances involving the united statesmilitary alliances involving australiamilitary alliances involving new zealandmilitary alliances involving south africamilitary alliances involving francepolitics of world war iihidden categories: cs1 spanish-language sources (es)cs1 maint: bot: original-url status unknownarticles with romanian-language external linkswebarchive template wayback linkscs1: long volume valuearticles with serbian-language external linkswikipedia indefinitely move-protected pageswikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesarticles with short descriptionuse dmy dates from september 2012articles to be expanded from july 2014all articles to be expandedarticles with empty sections from july 2014all articles with empty sectionsarticles using small message boxesall articles with unsourced statementsarticles with unsourced statements from may 2014articles with unsourced statements from february 2015articles with unsourced statements from january 2018wikipedia articles with gnd identifierswikipedia articles with nkc identifiers 



navigation menu


personal tools

not logged intalkcontributionscreate accountlog in 



namespaces

articletalk 




variants







views

readview sourceview history 



more





search



 







navigation


main pagecontentsfeatured contentcurrent eventsrandom articledonate to wikipediawikipedia store 



interaction


helpabout wikipediacommunity portalrecent changescontact page 



tools


what links hererelated changesupload filespecial pagespermanent linkpage informationwikidata itemcite this page 



print/export


create a bookdownload as pdfprintable version 



languages


afrikaansالعربيةasturianuazərbaycancaবাংলাбеларускаябългарскиbosanskibrezhonegcatalàčeštinadanskελληνικάespañolesperantoeuskaraفارسیfrançaisgaeilgegalego한국어հայերենहिन्दीhrvatskiidobahasa indonesiaíslenskaitalianoעבריתქართულიқазақшаkiswahilikurdîlatviešulëtzebuergeschlietuviųmagyarмакедонскиമലയാളംmaltiमराठीbahasa melayuмонголnederlands日本語norsknorsk nynorskoccitanoʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаpälzischpolskiportuguêsromânăрусскийscotsshqipsimple englishslovenčinaslovenščinaکوردیсрпски / srpskisrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиsuomisvenskatagalogதமிழ்ไทยtürkçeукраїнськаئۇيغۇرچە / uyghurchetiếng việt吴语粵語中文 
edit links 





 this page was last edited on 16 february 2019, at 09:45 (utc).
text is available under the creative commons attribution-sharealike license;
additional terms may apply.  by using this site, you agree to the terms of use and privacy policy. wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the wikimedia foundation, inc., a non-profit organization.


privacy policy
about wikipedia
disclaimers
contact wikipedia
developers
cookie statement
mobile view



 

 



(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgpageparsereport":{"limitreport":{"cputime":"2.232","walltime":"2.885","ppvisitednodes":{"value":17653,"limit":1000000},"ppgeneratednodes":{"value":0,"limit":1500000},"postexpandincludesize":{"value":477267,"limit":2097152},"templateargumentsize":{"value":48811,"limit":2097152},"expansiondepth":{"value":21,"limit":40},"expensivefunctioncount":{"value":18,"limit":500},"unstrip-depth":{"value":1,"limit":20},"unstrip-size":{"value":191391,"limit":5000000},"entityaccesscount":{"value":3,"limit":400},"timingprofile":["100.00% 1970.069      1 -total"," 27.90%  549.694      1 template:reflist"," 23.68%  466.435      1 template:infobox_former_country"," 20.59%  405.624      2 template:infobox","  9.01%  177.533     26 template:cite_book","  8.46%  166.641      2 template:link_language","  8.45%  166.403     54 template:flagicon","  8.41%  165.599      2 template:ro_icon","  8.31%  163.616     15 template:citation_needed","  8.11%  159.715      1 template:iso_3166_code"]},"scribunto":{"limitreport-timeusage":{"value":"0.907","limit":"10.000"},"limitreport-memusage":{"value":21694171,"limit":52428800}},"cachereport":{"origin":"mw1320","timestamp":"20190219095613","ttl":86400,"transientcontent":true}}});});
{"@context":"https:\/\/schema.org","@type":"article","name":"allies of world war ii","url":"https:\/\/en.wikipedia.org\/wiki\/allies_of_world_war_ii","sameas":"http:\/\/www.wikidata.org\/entity\/q329888","mainentity":"http:\/\/www.wikidata.org\/entity\/q329888","author":{"@type":"organization","name":"contributors to wikimedia projects"},"publisher":{"@type":"organization","name":"wikimedia foundation, inc.","logo":{"@type":"imageobject","url":"https:\/\/www.wikimedia.org\/static\/images\/wmf-hor-googpub.png"}},"datepublished":"2005-07-09t07:55:41z","datemodified":"2019-02-16t09:45:11z","image":"https:\/\/upload.wikimedia.org\/wikipedia\/commons\/c\/c3\/four_freedoms_flag_or_united_nations_honour_flag_ca_1943-1948.svg","headline":"grouping of the victorious countries of world war ii"}
(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgbackendresponsetime":157,"wghostname":"mw1328"});});


