



italian cuisine - wikipedia
document.documentelement.classname = document.documentelement.classname.replace( /(^|\s)client-nojs(\s|$)/, "$1client-js$2" );
(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgcanonicalnamespace":"","wgcanonicalspecialpagename":false,"wgnamespacenumber":0,"wgpagename":"italian_cuisine","wgtitle":"italian cuisine","wgcurrevisionid":883110154,"wgrevisionid":883110154,"wgarticleid":3735620,"wgisarticle":true,"wgisredirect":false,"wgaction":"view","wgusername":null,"wgusergroups":["*"],"wgcategories":["cs1 italian-language sources (it)","webarchive template wayback links","use dmy dates from may 2015","articles needing additional references from october 2015","all articles needing additional references","all articles with unsourced statements","articles with unsourced statements from march 2010","articles with unsourced statements from october 2015","articles needing additional references from december 2015","commons category link is on wikidata","wikipedia articles with bnf identifiers","wikipedia articles with lccn identifiers","wikipedia articles with ndl identifiers","italian cuisine"],"wgbreakframes":false,"wgpagecontentlanguage":"en","wgpagecontentmodel":"wikitext","wgseparatortransformtable":["",""],"wgdigittransformtable":["",""],"wgdefaultdateformat":"dmy","wgmonthnames":["","january","february","march","april","may","june","july","august","september","october","november","december"],"wgmonthnamesshort":["","jan","feb","mar","apr","may","jun","jul","aug","sep","oct","nov","dec"],"wgrelevantpagename":"italian_cuisine","wgrelevantarticleid":3735620,"wgrequestid":"xgwxrapamewaabss3qoaaaag","wgcspnonce":false,"wgisprobablyeditable":true,"wgrelevantpageisprobablyeditable":true,"wgrestrictionedit":[],"wgrestrictionmove":[],"wgflaggedrevsparams":{"tags":{}},"wgstablerevisionid":null,"wgcategorytreepagecategoryoptions":"{\"mode\":0,\"hideprefix\":20,\"showcount\":true,\"namespaces\":false}","wgwikieditorenabledmodules":[],"wgbetafeaturesfeatures":[],"wgmediavieweronclick":true,"wgmediaviewerenabledbydefault":true,"wgpopupsshouldsendmoduletouser":true,"wgpopupsconflictswithnavpopupgadget":false,"wgvisualeditor":{"pagelanguagecode":"en","pagelanguagedir":"ltr","pagevariantfallbacks":"en","usepageimages":true,"usepagedescriptions":true},"wgmfispagecontentmodeleditable":true,"wgmfenablefontchanger":true,"wgmfdisplaywikibasedescriptions":{"search":true,"nearby":true,"watchlist":true,"tagline":false},"wgrelatedarticles":null,"wgrelatedarticlesusecirrussearch":true,"wgrelatedarticlesonlyusecirrussearch":false,"wgwmeschemaeditattemptstepoversample":false,"wgpoweredbyhhvm":true,"wgulscurrentautonym":"english","wgnoticeproject":"wikipedia","wgcentralnoticecookiestodelete":[],"wgcentralnoticecategoriesusinglegacy":["fundraising","fundraising"],"wgwikibaseitemid":"q192786","wgscorenotelanguages":{"arabic":"العربية","catalan":"català","deutsch":"deutsch","english":"english","espanol":"español","italiano":"italiano","nederlands":"nederlands","norsk":"norsk","portugues":"português","suomi":"suomi","svenska":"svenska","vlaams":"west-vlams"},"wgscoredefaultnotelanguage":"nederlands","wgcentralauthmobiledomain":false,"wgcodemirrorenabled":true,"wgvisualeditortoolbarscrolloffset":0,"wgvisualeditorunsupportededitparams":["undo","undoafter","veswitched"],"wgeditsubmitbuttonlabelpublish":true,"oreswikiid":"enwiki","oresbaseurl":"http://ores.discovery.wmnet:8081/","oresapiversion":3});mw.loader.state({"ext.gadget.charinsert-styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site.styles":"ready","site.styles":"ready","noscript":"ready","user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site":"ready","user":"ready","user.options":"ready","user.tokens":"loading","ext.cite.styles":"ready","mediawiki.page.gallery.styles":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.shared":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.commonprint":"ready","mediawiki.toc.styles":"ready","wikibase.client.init":"ready","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.noscript":"ready","ext.uls.interlanguage":"ready","ext.wikimediabadges":"ready","ext.3d.styles":"ready","mediawiki.skinning.interface":"ready","skins.vector.styles":"ready"});mw.loader.implement("user.tokens@0tffind",function($,jquery,require,module){/*@nomin*/mw.user.tokens.set({"edittoken":"+\\","patroltoken":"+\\","watchtoken":"+\\","csrftoken":"+\\"});
});rlpagemodules=["ext.cite.ux-enhancements","ext.scribunto.logs","site","mediawiki.page.startup","mediawiki.page.ready","mediawiki.toc","mediawiki.searchsuggest","ext.gadget.teahouse","ext.gadget.referencetooltips","ext.gadget.watchlist-notice","ext.gadget.drn-wizard","ext.gadget.charinsert","ext.gadget.reftoolbar","ext.gadget.extra-toolbar-buttons","ext.gadget.switcher","ext.centralauth.centralautologin","mmv.head","mmv.bootstrap.autostart","ext.popups","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.init","ext.visualeditor.targetloader","ext.eventlogging","ext.wikimediaevents","ext.navigationtiming","ext.uls.eventlogger","ext.uls.init","ext.uls.compactlinks","ext.uls.interface","ext.quicksurveys.init","ext.centralnotice.geoip","ext.centralnotice.startup","skins.vector.js"];mw.loader.load(rlpagemodules);});























 





italian cuisine 
from wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 jump to navigation
jump to search
"italian restaurant" redirects here. for the television series, see italian restaurant.


this article needs additional citations for verification. please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed.find sources: "italian cuisine" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · jstor (october 2015) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
 some typical italian gastronomic products in a window display in imola
 pizza is one of the world's most popular foods and a common fast food item
part of a series on theculture of italy
history
people
languages
traditions
mythology and folklore
mythology
folklore

cuisine
festivals
religion
art
literature
music and performing arts
music

media
television
cinema

sport
monuments
world heritage sites

symbols
flag
coat of arms


 italy portalvte
italian cuisine
history
ancient roman cuisine
medieval cuisine
early modern cuisine
contemporary cuisine

regional cuisines
lombard cuisine
neapolitan cuisine
roman cuisine
sicilian cuisine
venetian cuisine
cuisine of abruzzo
cuisine of sardinia

lists
chefs
dishes
pasta
cheeses
pdo
desserts and pastries
restaurants
wine
igt
docg
doc
beer

see also
italian-american cuisine
sammarinese cuisine
osteria
trattoria
enoteca
sagra
list of italian chefs
meal structure
cuisine of corsica

 italy portalvte
italian cuisine is food typical of italy. it has developed through centuries of social and economic changes, with roots stretching to antiquity.[1]
significant changes occurred with the discovery of the new world and the introduction of potatoes, tomatoes, bell peppers, maize and sugar beet, this last introduced in quantity in the 18th century.[2][3] italian cuisine is known for its regional diversity, especially between the north and the south of the italian peninsula.[4][5][6] it offers an abundance of taste, and is one of the most popular and copied in the world.[7] it influenced several cuisines around the world, chiefly that of the united states.[8]
italian cuisine is generally characterized by its simplicity, with many dishes having only two to four main ingredients.[9] italian cooks rely chiefly on the quality of the ingredients rather than on elaborate preparation.[10] ingredients and dishes vary by region. many dishes that were once regional have proliferated with variations throughout the country.

.mw-parser-output .toclimit-2 .toclevel-1 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-3 .toclevel-2 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-4 .toclevel-3 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-5 .toclevel-4 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-6 .toclevel-5 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-7 .toclevel-6 ul{display:none}contents

1 history

1.1 antiquity
1.2 middle ages
1.3 early modern era
1.4 modern era


2 ingredients
3 regional variation

3.1 abruzzo and molise
3.2 basilicata
3.3 calabria
3.4 campania
3.5 emilia-romagna
3.6 friuli-venezia giulia
3.7 liguria
3.8 lazio
3.9 lombardy
3.10 marche
3.11 piedmont
3.12 puglia (apulia)
3.13 sardinia
3.14 sicily
3.15 trentino-alto adige
3.16 tuscany
3.17 umbria
3.18 valle d'aosta
3.19 veneto


4 meal structure
5 food establishments
6 drinks

6.1 coffee
6.2 alcoholic beverages

6.2.1 wine
6.2.2 beer
6.2.3 other




7 desserts
8 holiday cuisine
9 abroad

9.1 africa

9.1.1 libya
9.1.2 south africa


9.2 europe

9.2.1 france
9.2.2 great britain
9.2.3 slovenia


9.3 north and central america

9.3.1 canada and the usa
9.3.2 mexico


9.4 south america

9.4.1 argentina
9.4.2 brazil
9.4.3 venezuela




10 see also
11 notes
12 references
13 further reading
14 external links



history[edit]
italian cuisine has developed over the centuries. although the country known as italy did not unite until the 19th century, the cuisine can claim traceable roots as far back as the 4th century bce. food and culture were very important at that time as we can see from the cookbook (apicius) which dates back to first century bc.[11] through the centuries, neighbouring regions, conquerors, high-profile chefs, political upheaval, and the discovery of the new world have influenced its development. italian food started to form after the fall of the roman empire, when different cities began to separate and form their own traditions. many different types of bread and pasta were made, and there was a variation in cooking techniques and preparation. the country was split. regional cuisine is represented by some of the major cities in italy. for example, milan (north of italy) is known for its risottos, bologna (the central/middle of the country) is known for its tortellini and naples (the south) is famous for its pizzas[12] and spaghettis.

antiquity[edit]
see also: ancient roman cuisine and food and dining in the roman empire
the first known italian food writer was a greek sicilian named archestratus from syracuse in the 4th century bce. he wrote a poem that spoke of using "top quality and seasonal" ingredients. he said that flavors should not be masked by spices, herbs or other seasonings. he placed importance on simple preparation of fish.[13]
simplicity was abandoned and replaced by a culture of gastronomy as the roman empire developed. by the time de re coquinaria was published in the 1st century ce, it contained 470 recipes calling for heavy use of spices and herbs. the romans employed greek bakers to produce breads and imported cheeses from sicily as the sicilians had a reputation as the best cheesemakers. the romans reared goats for butchering, and grew artichokes and leeks.[13]

middle ages[edit]
see also: medieval cuisine
 a restored medieval kitchen inside verrucole castle, tuscany.
with culinary traditions from rome and athens, a cuisine developed in sicily that some consider the first real italian cuisine.[citation needed] arabs invaded sicily in the 9th century, introducing spinach, almonds, and rice.[14] during the 12th century, a norman king surveyed sicily and saw people making long strings made from flour and water called atriya, which eventually became trii, a term still used for spaghetti in southern italy.[15] normans also introduced casseroles, salt cod (baccalà), and stockfish, all of which remain popular.[16]
food preservation was either chemical or physical, as refrigeration did not exist. meats and fish were smoked, dried, or kept on ice. brine and salt were used to pickle items such as herring, and to cure pork. root vegetables were preserved in brine after they had been parboiled. other means of preservation included oil, vinegar, or immersing meat in congealed, rendered fat. for preserving fruits, liquor, honey, and sugar were used.[17]
the northern italian regions show a mix of germanic[18] and roman culture while the south reflects arab[14] influence, as much mediterranean cuisine was spread by arab trade.[19] the oldest italian book on cuisine is the 13th century liber de coquina written in naples. dishes include "roman-style" cabbage (ad usum romanorum), ad usum campanie which were "small leaves" prepared in the "campanian manner", a bean dish from the marca di trevisio, a torta, compositum londardicum which are similar to dishes prepared today. two other books from the 14th century include recipes for roman pastello, lasagna pie, and call for the use of salt from sardinia or chioggia.[20]

 saffron has been used in italy for centuries
in the 15th century, maestro martino was chef to the patriarch of aquileia at the vatican. his libro de arte coquinaria describes a more refined and elegant cuisine. his book contains a recipe for maccaroni siciliani, made by wrapping dough around a thin iron rod to dry in the sun. the macaroni was cooked in capon stock flavored with saffron, displaying persian influences. of particular note is martino's avoidance of excessive spices in favor of fresh herbs.[16] the roman recipes include coppiette (air-dried salami) and cabbage dishes. his florentine dishes include eggs with bolognese torta, sienese torta and genoese recipes such as piperata (sweets), macaroni, squash, mushrooms, and spinach pie with onions.[21]
martino's text was included in a 1475 book by bartolomeo platina printed in venice entitled de honesta voluptate et valetudine ("on honest pleasure and good health"). platina puts martino's "libro" in regional context, writing about perch from lake maggiore, sardines from lake garda, grayling from adda, hens from padua, olives from bologna and piceno, turbot from ravenna, rudd from lake trasimeno, carrots from viterbo, bass from the tiber, roviglioni and shad from lake albano, snails from rieti, figs from tuscolo, grapes from narni, oil from cassino, oranges from naples and eels from campania. grains from lombardy and campania are mentioned as is honey from sicily and taranto. wine from the ligurian coast, greco from tuscany and san severino, and trebbiano from tuscany and piceno are also mentioned in the book.[22]

early modern era[edit]
the courts of florence, rome, venice, and ferrara were central to the cuisine. cristoforo di messisbugo, steward to ippolito d'este, published banchetti composizioni di vivande in 1549. messisbugo gives recipes for pies and tarts (containing 124 recipes with various fillings). the work emphasizes the use of eastern spices and sugar.[23]

 bartolomeo scappi, personal chef to pope pius v
in 1570, bartolomeo scappi, personal chef to pope pius v, wrote his opera in five volumes, giving a comprehensive view of italian cooking of that period. it contains over 1,000 recipes, with information on banquets including displays and menus as well as illustrations of kitchen and table utensils. this book differs from most books written for the royal courts in its preference for domestic animals and courtyard birds rather than game.
recipes include lesser cuts of meats such as tongue, head, and shoulder. the third volume has recipes for fish in lent. these fish recipes are simple, including poaching, broiling, grilling, and frying after marination.
particular attention is given to seasons and places where fish should be caught. the final volume includes pies, tarts, fritters, and a recipe for a sweet neapolitan pizza (not the current savory version, as tomatoes had not yet been introduced to italy). however, such items from the new world as corn (maize) and turkey are included.[24]

in the first decade of the 17th century, giangiacomo castelvetro wrote breve racconto di tutte le radici di tutte l'herbe et di tutti i frutti (a brief account of all roots, herbs, and fruit), translated into english by gillian riley. originally from modena, castelvetro moved to england because he was a protestant. the book lists italian vegetables and fruits along with their preparation. he featured vegetables as a central part of the meal, not just as accompaniments.[24] castelvetro favored simmering vegetables in salted water and serving them warm or cold with olive oil, salt, fresh ground pepper, lemon juice, verjus, or orange juice. he also suggested roasting vegetables wrapped in damp paper over charcoal or embers with a drizzle of olive oil. castelvetro's book is separated into seasons with hop shoots in the spring and truffles in the winter, detailing the use of pigs in the search for truffles.[24] l'arte di ben cucinare published by bartolomeo stefani in 1662
in 1662, bartolomeo stefani, chef to the duchy of mantua, published l'arte di ben cucinare. he was the first to offer a section on vitto ordinario ("ordinary food"). the book described a banquet given by duke charles for queen christina of sweden, with details of the food and table settings for each guest, including a knife, fork, spoon, glass, a plate (instead of the bowls more often used), and a napkin.[25]
other books from this time, such as galatheo by giovanni della casa, tell how scalci ("waiters") should manage themselves while serving their guests. waiters should not scratch their heads or other parts of themselves, or spit, sniff, cough or sneeze while serving diners. the book also told diners not to use their fingers while eating and not to wipe sweat with their napkin.[25]

modern era[edit]
 apicius, de re coquinaria ("on the subject of cooking"), 1709 edition.
at the beginning of the 18th century, italian culinary books began to emphasize the regionalism of italian cuisine rather than french cuisine. books written then were no longer addressed to professional chefs but to bourgeois housewives.[26] periodicals in booklet form such as la cuoca cremonese (the cook of cremona) in 1794 give a sequence of ingredients according to season along with chapters on meat, fish, and vegetables. as the century progressed these books increased in size, popularity, and frequency.[27]
in the 18th century, medical texts warned peasants against eating refined foods as it was believed that these were poor for their digestion and their bodies required heavy meals. it was believed by some that peasants ate poorly because they preferred eating poorly. however, many peasants had to eat rotten food and moldy bread because that was all they could afford.[28]
in 1779, antonio nebbia from macerata in the marche region, wrote il cuoco maceratese (the cook of macerata). nebbia addressed the importance of local vegetables and pasta, rice, and gnocchi. for stock, he preferred vegetables and chicken over other meats.
in 1773, the neapolitan vincenzo corrado's il cuoco galante (the courteous cook) gave particular emphasis to vitto pitagorico (vegetarian food). "pythagorean food consists of fresh herbs, roots, flowers, fruits, seeds and all that is produced in the earth for our nourishment. it is so called because pythagoras, as is well known, only used such produce. there is no doubt that this kind of food appears to be more natural to man, and the use of meat is noxious." this book was the first to give the tomato a central role with thirteen recipes.

 tomatoes are a typical part of italian cuisine, but only entered common usage in the late 18th century.[29]
zuppa alli pomidoro in corrado's book is a dish similar to today's tuscan pappa al pomodoro. corrado's 1798 edition introduced a "treatise on the potato" after the french antoine-augustin parmentier's successful promotion of the tuber.[30] in 1790, francesco leonardi in his book l'apicio moderno ("modern apicius") sketches a history of the italian cuisine from the roman age and gives as first a recipe of a tomato-based sauce.[31]
in the 19th century, giovanni vialardi, chef to king victor emmanuel, wrote a treatise of modern cookery and patisserie with recipes "suitable for a modest household." many of his recipes are for regional dishes from turin including twelve for potatoes such as genoese cappon magro. in 1829, il nuovo cuoco milanese economico by giovanni felice luraschi featured milanese dishes such as kidney with anchovies and lemon and gnocchi alla romana. gian battista and giovanni ratto's la cucina genovese in 1871 addressed the cuisine of liguria. this book contained the first recipe for pesto. la cucina teorico-pratica written by ippolito cavalcanti described the first recipe for pasta with tomatoes.[32]
la scienza in cucina e l'arte di mangiare bene (the science of cooking and the art of eating well), by pellegrino artusi, first published in 1891, is widely regarded as the canon of classic modern italian cuisine, and it is still in print. its recipes predominantly originate from romagna and tuscany, where he lived.

ingredients[edit]
 pesto, a ligurian sauce made out of basil, olive oil and pine nuts, and which can be eaten with pasta or other dishes such as soup.
italian cuisine has a great variety of different ingredients which are commonly used, ranging from fruits, vegetables, sauces, meats, etc. in the north of italy, fish (such as cod, or baccalà), potatoes, rice, corn (maize), sausages, pork, and different types of cheeses are the most common ingredients. pasta dishes with use of tomato are spread in all italy.[33][34] italians like their ingredients fresh and subtly seasoned and spiced.[35]
in northern italy though there are many kinds of stuffed pasta, polenta and risotto are equally popular if not more so.[36] ligurian ingredients include several types of fish and seafood dishes. basil (found in pesto), nuts, and olive oil are very common. in emilia-romagna, common ingredients include ham (prosciutto), sausage (cotechino), different sorts of salami, truffles, grana, parmigiano-reggiano, and tomatoes (bolognese sauce or ragù).

 olive oil is the most commonly used vegetable fat in italian cooking, and as the basis for sauces, often replaces animal fats of butter or lard.[37]
traditional central italian cuisine uses ingredients such as tomatoes, all kinds of meat, fish, and pecorino cheese. in tuscany, pasta (especially pappardelle) is traditionally served with meat sauce (including game meat). in southern italy, tomatoes (fresh or cooked into tomato sauce), peppers, olives and olive oil, garlic, artichokes, oranges, ricotta cheese, eggplants, zucchini, certain types of fish (anchovies, sardines and tuna), and capers are important components to the local cuisine.
italian cuisine is also well known (and well regarded) for its use of a diverse variety of pasta. pasta include noodles in various lengths, widths, and shapes. most pastas may be distinguished by the shapes for which they are named—penne, maccheroni, spaghetti, linguine, fusilli, lasagne, and many more varieties that are filled with other ingredients like ravioli and tortellini.
the word pasta is also used to refer to dishes in which pasta products are a primary ingredient. it is usually served with sauce. there are hundreds of different shapes of pasta with at least locally recognized names.
examples include spaghetti (thin rods), rigatoni (tubes or cylinders), fusilli (swirls), and lasagne (sheets). dumplings, like gnocchi (made with potatoes or pumpkin) and noodles like spätzle, are sometimes considered pasta. they are both traditional in parts of italy.
pasta is categorized in two basic styles: dried and fresh. dried pasta made without eggs can be stored for up to two years under ideal conditions, while fresh pasta will keep for a couple of days in the refrigerator. pasta is generally cooked by boiling. under italian law, dry pasta (pasta secca) can only be made from durum wheat flour or durum wheat semolina, and is more commonly used in southern italy compared to their northern counterparts, who traditionally prefer the fresh egg variety.
durum flour and durum semolina have a yellow tinge in color. italian pasta is traditionally cooked al dente (italian: firm to the bite, meaning not too soft). outside italy, dry pasta is frequently made from other types of flour, but this yields a softer product. there are many types of wheat flour with varying gluten and protein levels depending on variety of grain used.
particular varieties of pasta may also use other grains and milling methods to make the flour, as specified by law. some pasta varieties, such as pizzoccheri, are made from buckwheat flour. fresh pasta may include eggs (pasta all'uovo "egg pasta"). whole wheat pasta has become increasingly popular because of its supposed health benefits over pasta made from refined flour.

regional variation[edit]
each area has its own specialties, primarily at a regional level, but also at provincial level. the differences can come from a bordering country (such as france or austria), whether a region is close to the sea or the mountains, and economics.[38] italian cuisine is also seasonal with priority placed on the use of fresh produce.[39][40]

abruzzo and molise[edit]
main article: cuisine of abruzzo
 a montepulciano d'abruzzo wine labelled as being made from old vines
pasta, meat, and vegetables are central to the cuisine of abruzzo and molise. chili peppers (peperoncini) are typical of abruzzo, where they are called diavoletti ("little devils") for their spicy heat. due to the long history of shepherding in abruzzo and molise, lamb dishes are common. lamb is often paired with pasta.[41] mushrooms (usually wild mushrooms), rosemary, and garlic are also extensively used in abruzzese cuisine.
best-known is the extra virgin olive oil produced in the local farms on the hills of the region, marked by the quality level dop and considered one of the best in the country.[42] renowned wines like montepulciano docg and trebbiano d'abruzzo doc are considered amongst the world’s finest wines.[43] in 2012 a bottle of trebbiano d'abruzzo colline teramane ranked #1 in the top 50 italian wine award.[44] centerbe ("hundred herbs") is a strong (72% alcohol), spicy herbal liqueur drunk by the locals. another liqueur is genziana, a soft distillate of gentian roots.
the best-known dish from abruzzo is arrosticini, little pieces of castrated lamb on a wooden stick and cooked on coals. the chitarra (literally "guitar") is a fine stringed tool that pasta dough is pressed through for cutting. in the province of teramo, famous local dishes include the virtù soup (made with legumes, vegetables, and pork meat), the timballo (pasta sheets filled with meat, vegetables or rice), and the mazzarelle (lamb intestines filled with garlic, marjoram, lettuce, and various spices). the popularity of saffron, grown in the province of l'aquila, has waned in recent years.[41] the most famous dish of molise is cavatelli, a long shaped, handmade maccheroni-type pasta made of flour, semolina, and water, often served with meat sauce, broccoli, or mushrooms. pizzelle cookies are a common dessert, especially around christmas.

basilicata[edit]
 baccalà alla lucana is a traditional dish from basilicata
the cuisine of basilicata is mostly based on inexpensive ingredients and deeply anchored in rural traditions.
pork is an integral part of the regional cuisine,[citation needed] often made into sausages or roasted on a spit. famous dry sausages from the region are lucanica and soppressata. wild boar, mutton, and lamb are also popular. pasta sauces are generally based on meats or vegetables. spicy peperoncini is largely used, as well as the so-called peperoni cruschi ("crunchy peppers").[45] the region produces cheeses like pecorino di filiano, canestrato di molitern, pallone di gravina, and paddraccio and olive oils like the vulture.[46]
basilicata is known for spaghetti-like pasta troccoli and capunti,[47] a thick and short oval pasta whose shape is often compared to that of an open empty pea pod. capunti are usually served with a hearty vegetable tomato sauce or various meat sauces.
among the traditional dishes are lagane e ceci, also known as piatto del brigante (brigand's dish), pasta prepared with chick peas and peeled tomatoes;[48] rafanata, a type of omelette with horseradish; ciaudedda, a vegetable stew with artichokes, potatoes, broad beans, and pancetta;[49] and the baccalà alla lucana, one of the few recipes made with fish. desserts include taralli dolci, made with sugar glaze and scented with anise and calzoncelli, fried pastries filled with a cream of chestnuts and chocolate.
the most famous wine of the region is the aglianico del vulture, others include matera, terre dell'alta val d'agri and grottino di roccanova.[citation needed]
basilicata is also known for its mineral waters which are sold widely in italy. the springs are mostly located in the volcanic basin of the vulture area.[50]

calabria[edit]
in calabria, a history of french rule under the house of anjou and napoleon, along with spanish influences, affected the language and culinary skills as seen in the naming of things such as cake, gatò, from the french gateau. seafood includes swordfish, shrimp, lobster, sea urchin, and squid. macaroni-type pasta is widely used in regional dishes, often served with goat, beef, or pork sauce and salty ricotta.[51]
main courses include frìttuli (prepared by boiling pork rind, meat, and trimmings in pork fat), different varieties of spicy sausages (like nduja and capicola), goat, and land snails. melon and watermelon are traditionally served in a chilled fruit salad or wrapped in ham.[52] calabrian wines include greco di bianco, bivongi, cirò, dominici, lamezia, melissa, pollino, sant'anna di isola capo rizzuto, san vito di luzzi, savuto, scavigna, and verbicaro.
calabrese pizza has a neapolitan-based structure with fresh tomato sauce and a cheese base, but is unique because of its spicy flavor. some of the ingredients included in a calabrese pizza are thinly sliced hot soppressata, hot capicola, hot peppers, and fresh mozzarella.

campania[edit]
main article: neapolitan cuisine
 traditional neapolitan pizza
 mozzarella di bufala is a dairy product traditionally made from buffalo milk in southern italy
campania extensively produces tomatoes, peppers, spring onions, potatoes, artichokes, fennel, lemons, and oranges which all take on the flavor of volcanic soil. the gulf of naples offers fish and seafood. campania is one of the largest producers and consumers of pasta in italy, especially spaghetti. in the regional cuisine, pasta is prepared in various styles that can feature tomato sauce, cheese, clams, and shellfish.[53]
spaghetti alla puttanesca is a popular dish made with olives, tomatoes, anchovies, capers, chili peppers, and garlic. the region is well-known also for its mozzarella production (especially from the milk of water buffalo) that's used in a variety of dishes, including parmigiana (shallow fried eggplant slices layered with cheese and tomato sauce, then baked). desserts include struffoli (deep fried balls of dough), ricotta-based pastiera and sfogliatelle, and rum-dipped babà.[53]
originating in neapolitan cuisine, pizza has become popular in many different parts of the world.[54] pizza is an oven-baked, flat, disc-shaped bread typically topped with a tomato sauce, cheese (usually mozzarella), and various toppings depending on the culture. since the original pizza, several other types of pizzas have evolved.
since naples was the capital of the kingdom of two sicilies, its cuisine took much from the culinary traditions of all the campania region, reaching a balance between dishes based on rural ingredients (pasta, vegetables, cheese) and seafood dishes (fish, crustaceans, mollusks). a vast variety of recipes is influenced by the local aristocratic cuisine, like timballo and the sartù di riso, pasta or rice dishes with very elaborate preparation, while the dishes coming from the popular traditions contain inexpensive but nutritionally healthy ingredients, like pasta with beans and other pasta dishes with vegetables.
famous regional wines are aglianico (taurasi), fiano, falanghina, and greco di tufo.

emilia-romagna[edit]
 parmigiano-reggiano is a well-known italian hard cheese
emilia-romagna is known for its egg and filled pasta made with soft wheat flour. the romagna subregion is renowned for pasta dishes like cappelletti, garganelli, strozzapreti, sfoglia lorda, and tortelli alla lastra as well as cheeses such as squacquerone, piadina snacks are also a specialty of the subregion.
in the emilia subregion, except piacenza which is heavily influenced by the cuisines of lombardy, rice is eaten to a lesser extent. polenta, a maize-based dish, is common in both emilia and romagna.

 tagliatelle with bolognese sauce
bologna and modena are notable for pasta dishes like tortellini, lasagne, gramigna, and tagliatelle which are found also in many other parts of the region in different declinations. the celebrated balsamic vinegar is made only in the emilian cities of modena and reggio emilia, following legally binding traditional procedures.[55] parmigiano reggiano cheese is produced in reggio emilia, parma, modena, and bologna and is often used in cooking. grana padano cheese is produced in piacenza.
although the adriatic coast is a major fishing area (well known for its eels and clams), the region is more famous for its meat products, especially pork-based, that include parma's prosciutto, culatello, and felino salami; piacenza's pancetta, coppa, and salami; bologna's mortadella and salame rosa; modena's zampone, cotechino, and cappello del prete; and ferrara's salama da sugo. piacenza is also known for some dishes prepared with horse and donkey meat. regional desserts include zuppa inglese (custard-based dessert made with sponge cake and alchermes liqueur) and panpepato (christmas cake made with pepper, chocolate, spices, and almonds).

friuli-venezia giulia[edit]
 jota is a traditional stew in the venezia giulia region
friuli-venezia giulia conserved, in its cuisine, the historical links with austria-hungary. udine and pordenone, in the western part of friuli, are known for their traditional san daniele del friuli ham, montasio cheese, and frico cheese. other typical dishes are pitina (meatballs made of smoked meats), game, and various types of gnocchi and polenta.
the majority of the eastern regional dishes are heavily influenced by austrian, hungarian, slovene and croatian cuisines: typical dishes include istrian stew (soup of beans, sauerkraut, potatoes, bacon, and spare ribs), vienna sausages, goulash, ćevapi, apple strudel, gugelhupf. pork can be spicy and is often prepared over an open hearth called a fogolar. collio goriziano, friuli isonzo, colli orientali del friuli, and ramandolo are well-known doc regional wines.

liguria[edit]
 focaccia with rosemary. focaccia is widely associated with ligurian cuisine
liguria is known for herbs and vegetables (as well as seafood) in its cuisine. savory pies are popular, mixing greens and artichokes along with cheeses, milk curds, and eggs. onions and olive oil are used. because of a lack of land suitable for wheat, the ligurians use chickpeas in farinata and polenta-like panissa. the former is served plain or topped with onions, artichokes, sausage, cheese or young anchovies.[56]
hilly districts use chestnuts as a source of carbohydrates. ligurian pastas include corzetti from the polcevera valley; pansoti, a triangular shaped ravioli filled with vegetables; piccagge, pasta ribbons made with a small amount of egg and served with artichoke sauce or pesto sauce; trenette, made from whole wheat flour cut into long strips and served with pesto; boiled beans and potatoes; and trofie, a ligurian gnocchi made from whole grain flour and boiled potatoes, made into a spiral shape and often tossed in pesto.[56] many ligurians emigrated to argentina in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, influencing the cuisine of the country (which was otherwise dominated by meat and dairy products that the narrow ligurian hinterland would have not allowed).

lazio[edit]
main article: roman cuisine
 spaghetti alla carbonara
pasta dishes based on the use of guanciale (unsmoked bacon prepared with pig's jowl or cheeks) are often found in lazio, such as pasta alla carbonara and pasta all'amatriciana. another pasta dish of the region is arrabbiata, with spicy tomato sauce. the regional cuisine widely use offal, resulting in dishes like the entrail-based rigatoni with pajata sauce and coda alla vaccinara.[57]
iconic of lazio is cheese made from ewes' milk (pecorino romano), porchetta (savory, fatty, and moist boneless pork roast) and frascati white wine. the influence of the ancient jewish community can be noticed in the roman cuisine's traditional carciofi alla giudia.[57]

lombardy[edit]
main article: lombard cuisine
 risotto alla milanese with saffron
the regional cuisine of lombardy is heavily based upon ingredients like maize, rice, beef, pork, butter, and lard. rice dishes are very popular in this region, often found in soups as well as risotto. the best-known version is risotto alla milanese, flavoured with saffron and typically served with many typical milanese main courses, such as ossobuco alla milanese (cross-cut veal shanks braised with vegetables, white wine and broth) and cotoletta alla milanese (a fried cutlet similar to wiener schnitzel, but cooked "bone-in").[58]
other regional specialities include cassoeula (a typical winter dish prepared with cabbage and pork), cremona's mostarda (rich condiment made with candied fruit and a mustard flavoured syrup), valtellina's bresaola (air-dried salted beef) and pizzoccheri (a flat ribbon pasta made with 80% buckwheat flour and 20% wheat flour cooked along with greens, cubed potatoes, and layered with pieces of valtellina casera cheese), and mantua's tortelli di zucca (ravioli with pumpkin filling) accompanied by melted butter and followed by turkey stuffed with chicken or other stewed meats.[58]

 gorgonzola is a traditional blue cheese
regional cheeses include robiola, crescenza, taleggio, gorgonzola, and grana padano (the plains of central and southern lombardy allow intensive cattle farming). polenta is common across the region. regional desserts include the famous panettone christmas cake (sweet bread with candied orange, citron, and lemon zest, as well as raisins, which are added dry and not soaked).

marche[edit]
on the coast of marche, fish and seafood are produced. inland, wild and domestic pigs are used for sausages and hams. these hams are not thinly sliced, but cut into bite-sized chunks. suckling pig, chicken, and fish are often stuffed with rosemary or fennel fronds and garlic before being roasted or placed on the spit.[59]
ascoli, marche's southernmost province, is well known for olive all'ascolana, (stoned olives stuffed with several minced meats, egg, and parmesan, then fried).[60] another well-known marche product are the maccheroncini di campofilone, from little town of campofilone, a kind of hand-made pasta made only of hard grain flour and eggs, cut so thin that melts in one's mouth.

piedmont[edit]
 traditional piedmontese agnolotti
between the alps and the po valley, featuring a large number of different ecosystems, the piedmont region offers the most refined and varied cuisine of the italian peninsula. as a point of union between traditional italian and french cuisine, piedmont is the italian region with the largest number of cheeses with protected geographical status and wines under doc. it is also the region where both the slow food association and the most prestigious school of italian cooking, the university of gastronomic sciences, were founded.[61]
piedmont is a region where gathering nuts, mushrooms, and cardoons, as well as hunting and fishing are common place. truffles, garlic, seasonal vegetables, cheese, and rice featured in the cuisine. wines from the nebbiolo grape such as barolo and barbaresco are produced as well as wines from the barbera grape, fine sparkling wines, and the sweet, lightly sparkling, moscato d'asti. the region is also famous for its vermouth and ratafia production.[61]
castelmagno is a prized cheese of the region. piedmont is also famous for the quality of its carrù beef (particularly bue grasso, "fat ox"), hence the tradition of eating raw meat seasoned with garlic oil, lemon, and salt; carpaccio; brasato al vino, wine stew made from marinated beef; and boiled beef served with various sauces.[61]
the food most typical of the piedmont tradition are the traditional agnolotti (pasta folded over with roast beef and vegetable stuffing), panissa (a typical dish of vercelli, a kind of risotto with arborio rice or maratelli rice, the typical kind of saluggia beans, onion, barbera wine, lard, salami, salt, and pepper), taglierini (thinner version of tagliatelle), bagna cauda (sauce of garlic, anchovies, olive oil, and butter), and bicerin (hot drink made of coffee, chocolate, and whole milk). piedmont is one of the italian capitals of pastry and chocolate in particular, with products like nutella, gianduiotto, and marron glacé that are famous worldwide.[61]

puglia (apulia)[edit]
 orecchiette with tomato sauce
apulia is a massive food producer: major production includes wheat, tomatoes, zucchini, broccoli, bell peppers, potatoes, spinach, eggplants, cauliflower, fennel, endive, chickpeas, lentils, beans, and cheese (like the traditional caciocavallo cheese). apulia is also the largest producer of olive oil in italy. the sea offers abundant fish and seafood that are extensively used in the regional cuisine, especially oysters, and mussels.
goat and lamb are occasionally used.[62] the region is known for pasta made from durum wheat and traditional pasta dishes featuring orecchiette-type pasta, often served with tomato sauce, potatoes, mussels, or broccoli rabe. pasta with cherry tomatoes and arugula is also popular.[63]
regional desserts include zeppola, doughnuts usually topped with powdered sugar and filled with custard, jelly, cannoli-style pastry cream, or a butter-and-honey mixture. for christmas, apulians make a very traditional rose-shaped pastry called cartellate. these are fried and dipped in vin cotto, which is a either a wine or fig juice reduction.

sardinia[edit]
main article: sardinian cuisine
 an exhibition of typical sardinian pasta shapes, cakes, and pastries
suckling pig and wild boar are roasted on the spit or boiled in stews of beans and vegetables, thickened with bread. herbs such as mint and myrtle are widely used in the regional cuisine. sardinia also has many special types of bread, made dry, which keeps longer than high-moisture breads.[64]

 traditional carasau bread
also baked are carasau bread civraxu, coccoi a pitzus, a highly decorative bread, and pistocu made with flour and water only, originally meant for herders, but often served at home with tomatoes, basil, oregano, garlic, and a strong cheese. rock lobster, scampi, squid, tuna, and sardines are the predominant seafoods.[64]
casu marzu is a very strong cheese produced in sardinia, but is of questionable legality due to hygiene concerns.[65]

sicily[edit]
main article: sicilian cuisine
sicily shows traces of all the cultures which established themselves on the island over the last two millennia. although its cuisine undoubtably has a predominantly italian base, sicilian food also has spanish, greek and arab influences. dionysus is said to have introduced wine to the region: a trace of historical influence from ancient greece.[66]

 pasta alla norma is amongst sicily's most historic and iconic dishes
the ancient romans introduced lavish dishes based on goose. the byzantines favored sweet and sour flavors and the arabs brought sugar, citrus, rice, spinach, and saffron. the normans and hohenstaufens had a fondness for meat dishes. the spanish introduced items from the new world including chocolate, maize, turkey, and tomatoes.[66]
much of the island's cuisine encourages the use of fresh vegetables such as eggplant, peppers, and tomatoes, as well as fish such as tuna, sea bream, sea bass, cuttlefish, and swordfish. in trapani, in the extreme western corner of the island, north african influences are clear in the use of various couscous based dishes, usually combined with fish.[67] mint is used extensively in cooking unlike the rest of italy.
traditional specialties from sicily include arancini (a form of deep-fried rice croquettes), pasta alla norma, caponata, pani ca meusa, and a host of desserts and sweets such as cannoli, granita, and cassata).[68]
typical of sicily is marsala, a red, fortified wine similar to port and largely exported.[69][70]

trentino-alto adige[edit]
 traditional speckknödel soup. the südtirol cuisine has strong alpine regional and austrian influence
before the council of trent in the middle of the 16th century, the region was known for the simplicity of its peasant cuisine. when the prelates of the catholic church established there, they brought the art of fine cooking with them. later, also influences from venice and the austrian habsburg empire came in.[71]
the trentino subregion produces various types of sausages, polenta, yogurt, cheese, potato cake, funnel cake, and freshwater fish. in the südtirol (alto adige) subregion, due to the german-speaking majority population, strong austrian and slavic influences prevail. the most renowned local product is traditional speck juniper-flavored ham which, as speck alto adige, is regulated by the european union under the protected geographical indication (pgi) status. goulash, knödel, apple strudel, kaiserschmarrn, krapfen, rösti, spätzle, and rye bread are regular dishes, along with potatoes, dumpling, homemade sauerkraut, and lard.[71] the territory of bolzano is also reputed for its müller-thurgau white wines.

tuscany[edit]
 finocchiona, a classic southern tuscan salami
simplicity is central to the tuscan cuisine. legumes, bread, cheese, vegetables, mushrooms, and fresh fruit are used. a good example of typical tuscan food is ribollita, a notable soup whose name literally means "reboiled." like most tuscan cuisine, the soup has peasant origins. ribollita was originally made by reheating (i.e. reboiling) the leftover minestrone or vegetable soup from the previous day. there are many variations but the main ingredients always include leftover bread, cannellini beans, and inexpensive vegetables such as carrot, cabbage, beans, silverbeet, cavolo nero (tuscan kale), onion, and olive oil.
a regional tuscan pasta known as pici resembles thick, grainy-surfaced spaghetti, and is often rolled by hand. white truffles from san miniato appear in october and november. high-quality beef, used for the traditional florentine steak, come from the chianina cattle breed of the chiana valley and the maremmana from maremma.
pork is also produced.[72] the region is well-known also for its rich game, especially wild boar, hare, fallow deer, roe deer, and pheasant that often are used to prepare pappardelle dishes. regional desserts include panforte (prepared with honey, fruits, and nuts), ricciarelli (biscuits made using an almond base with sugar, honey, and egg white), and cavallucci (cookies made with almonds, candied fruits, coriander, flour, and honey). well-known regional wines include brunello di montalcino, carmignano, chianti, morellino di scansano, parrina, sassicaia, and vernaccia di san gimignano.

umbria[edit]
 a varietal sagrantino indigenous to the region of umbria
many umbrian dishes are prepared by boiling or roasting with local olive oil and herbs. vegetable dishes are popular in the spring and summer,[73] while fall and winter sees meat from hunting and black truffles from norcia. meat dishes include the traditional wild boar sausages, pheasants, geese, pigeons, frogs, and snails. castelluccio is known for its lentils. spoleto and monteleone are known for spelt. freshwater fish include lasca, trout, freshwater perch, grayling, eel, barbel, whitefish, and tench.[74] orvieto and sagrantino di montefalco are important regional wines.

valle d'aosta[edit]
 fontina cheese from valle d'aosta
in the aosta valley, bread-thickened soups are customary as well as cheese fondue, chestnuts, potatoes, rice. polenta is a staple along with rye bread, smoked bacon, motsetta (cured chamois meat), and game from the mountains and forests. butter and cream are important in stewed, roasted, and braised dishes.[75] typical regional products include fontina cheese, vallée d'aoste lard d'arnad, red wines and génépi artemisia-based liqueur.[76]

veneto[edit]
main article: venetian cuisine
venice and many surrounding parts of veneto are known for risotto, a dish whose ingredients can highly vary upon different areas. fish and seafood are added in regions closer to the coast while pumpkin, asparagus, radicchio, and frog legs appear farther away from the adriatic sea.
made from finely ground maize meal, polenta is a traditional, rural food typical of veneto and most of northern italy. it may be included in stirred dishes and baked dishes. polenta can be served with various cheese, stockfish, or meat dishes. some polenta dishes include porcini, rapini, or other vegetables or meats, such as small song-birds in the case of the venetian and lombard dish polenta e osei, or sausages. in some areas of veneto it can be also made of a particular variety of cornmeal, named biancoperla, so that the color of polenta is white and not yellow (the so-called polenta bianca).

 polenta served with sopressa and mushrooms, a traditional peasant food of veneto
beans, peas, and other legumes are seen in these areas with pasta e fagioli (beans and pasta) and risi e bisi (rice and peas). venice features heavy dishes using exotic spices and sauces. ingredients such as stockfish or simple marinated anchovies are found here as well.
less fish and more meat is eaten away from the coast. other typical products are sausages such as soppressa vicentina, garlic salami, piave cheese, and asiago cheese. high quality vegetables are prized, such as red radicchio from treviso and white asparagus from bassano del grappa. perhaps the most popular dish of venice is fegato alla veneziana, thinly-sliced veal liver sauteed with onions.
squid and cuttlefish are common ingredients, as is squid ink, called nero di seppia.[77][78] regional desserts include tiramisu (made of biscuits dipped in coffee, layered with a whipped mixture of egg yolks and mascarpone, and flavored with liquor and cocoa[79]), baicoli (biscuits made with butter and vanilla), and nougat.
the most celebrated venetian wines include bardolino, prosecco, soave, amarone, and valpolicella doc wines.

meal structure[edit]
main article: meal structure in italy
 a typical italian breakfast, consisting of cappuccino and brioche / croissant / cornetto.
traditionally, meals in italy typically contained four or five courses.[80] especially on weekends, meals are often seen as a time to spend with family and friends rather than simply for sustenance; thus, meals tend to be longer than in other cultures. during holidays such as christmas and new year's eve, feasts can last for hours.[81]
today, the traditional italian menu is kept mainly for special events (such as weddings) while an everyday menu includes only the first and/or second course, the side dish, and coffee. a notable aspect of italian meals is that the primo or first course is usually a more filling dish such as risotto or pasta. italian cuisine also includes single courses (all-in-one courses), providing carbohydrates and proteins at the same time (e.g. pasta and legumes).

 a bottle of sparkling prosecco, which one would have as an aperitivo


meal stage

composition


aperitivo

apéritif usually enjoyed as an appetizer before a large meal, may be: campari, martini, cinzano, lucano, prosecco, aperol, spritz, vermouth, negroni.


antipasto

literally "before (the) meal", hot or cold, usually consist of cheese, ham, sliced sausage, marinated vegetables or fish, and bread appetizers.


primo

"first course", usually consists of a hot dish like pasta, risotto, gnocchi, or soup.


secondo

"second course", the main dish, usually fish or meat with potatoes. traditionally veal, pork, and chicken are most commonly used, at least in the north, though beef has become more popular since world war ii and wild game is found, particularly in tuscany. fish is also very popular, especially in the south.


contorno

"side dish", may be a salad or cooked vegetables. a traditional menu features salad along with the main course.


formaggio e frutta

"cheese and fruits", the first dessert. local cheeses may be part of the antipasto or contorno as well.


dolce

"sweet", such as cakes (like tiramisu), cookies or ice-cream


caffè

coffee.


digestivo

"digestives", liquors/liqueurs (grappa, amaro, limoncello, sambuca, nocino, sometimes referred to as ammazzacaffè, "coffee killer").


food establishments[edit]
each type of establishment has a defined role and traditionally sticks to it.[82]



establishment

description


agriturismo

working farms that offer accommodations and meals. sometimes meals are served to guests only. according to italian law, they can only serve local-made products (except drinks). marked by a green and gold sign with a knife and fork.[83]


bar/caffè

locations which serve coffee, soft drinks, juice and alcohol. hours are generally from 6am to 10pm. foods may include croissants and other sweet breads (often called 'brioche' in northern italy), panini, tramezzini (sandwiches) and spuntini (snacks such as olives, potato crisps and small pieces of frittata).[83]


birreria

a bar that offers beer; found in central and northern regions of italy.[83]


bruschetteria

specialises in bruschetta, though other dishes may also be offered.


frasca/locanda

friulian wine producers that open for the evening and may offer food along with their wines.[83]


gelateria

an italian ice cream shop/bar that sells gelato. a shop where the customer can get his or her gelato to go, or sit down and eat it in a cup or a cone. bigger ice desserts, coffee, or liquors may also be ordered.


osteria

focused on simple food of the region, often having no written menu. many are open only at night but some open for lunch.[84] the name has become fashionable for upscale restaurants with a rustic regional style.


paninoteca/panineria

sandwich shop open during the day.[84]


pizzeria

specializing in pizza, often with wood-fired ovens.[85]


polenteria

serving polenta; uncommon, and found only in northern regions.[86]


ristorante

often offers upscale cuisine and printed menus.[85]


rosticceria

fast food restaurant, offering local dishes like cotoletta alla milanese, roasted meat (usually pork or chicken), supplì and arancini even as take-away.


spaghetteria

originating in naples, offering pasta dishes and other main courses.[87]


tavola calda

literally "hot table", offers pre-made regional dishes. most open at 11am and close late.[88]


trattoria

a dining establishment, often family run, with inexpensive prices and an informal atmosphere.[89]


food establishments



the garden at an osteria in castello roganzuolo, veneto, italy






a pizzeria in naples, italy circa 1910






interior of a trattoria in tolmezzo, friuli, italy




drinks[edit]
coffee[edit]
see also: espresso
 espresso
italian style coffee (caffè), also known as espresso, is made from a blend of coffee beans. espresso beans are roasted medium to medium dark in the north, and darker as one moves south.
a common misconception is that espresso has more caffeine than other coffee; in fact the opposite is true. the longer roasting period extracts more caffeine. the modern espresso machine, invented in 1937 by achille gaggia, uses a pump and pressure system with water heated to 90 to 95 °c (194 to 203 °f) and forced at high pressure through a few grams of finely ground coffee in 25–30 seconds, resulting in about 25 milliliters (0.85 fl oz, two tablespoons) of liquid.[90]
home coffee makers are simpler but work under the same principle. la napoletana is a four-part stove-top unit with grounds loosely placed inside a filter; the kettle portion is filled with water and once boiling, the unit is inverted to drip through the grounds. the moka per il caffè is a three-part stove-top unit that is placed on the stovetop with loosely packed grounds in a strainer; the water rises from steam pressure and is forced through the grounds into the top portion. in both cases, the water passes through the grounds just once.[91]
espresso is usually served in a demitasse cup. caffè macchiato is topped with a bit of steamed milk or foam; ristretto is made with less water, and is stronger; cappuccino is mixed or topped with steamed, mostly frothy, milk. it is generally considered a morning beverage, and usually is not taken after a meal; caffelatte is equal parts espresso and steamed milk, similar to café au lait, and is typically served in a large cup. latte macchiato (spotted milk) is a glass of warm milk with a bit of coffee and caffè corretto is "corrected" with a few drops of an alcoholic beverage such as grappa or brandy.
the bicerin is also an italian coffee, from turin. it is a mixture of cappuccino and traditional hot chocolate, as it consists of a mix of coffee and drinking chocolate, and with a small addition of milk. it is quite thick, and often whipped cream/foam with chocolate powder and sugar is added on top.

alcoholic beverages[edit]
wine[edit]
main article: italian wine
 docg and doc labels on two wine bottles
 tuscan chianti in a traditional fiasco
italy produces the largest amount of wine in the world and is both the largest exporter and consumer of wine. only about a quarter of this wine is put into bottles for individual sale. two-thirds is bulk wine used for blending in france and germany. the wine distilled into spirits in italy exceeds the production of wine in the entirety of the new world.[92] there are twenty separate wine regions.[93]
those vineyards producing great wines are trying to do away with the old image of jug wines so often associated with italian wine. to promote this, the italian government passed the denominazione di origine controllata (doc) law in 1963 to regulate place of origin, quality, production method, and type of grape. the designation indicazione geografica tipica (igt) is a less restrictive designation to help a wine maker graduate to the doc level. in 1980, the government created the denominazione di origine controllata e garantita (docg), reserved for only the best wines.[94]
in italy wine is commonly consumed (alongside water) in meals, which are rarely served without it, though it is extremely uncommon for meals to be served with any other drink, alcoholic, or otherwise.

beer[edit]
main article: beer in italy
italy hosts a wide variety of different beers, which are usually pale lager. beer is not as popular and widespread as wine (even though this is changing as beer becomes increasingly popular), and average beer consumption in italy is less than in some other neighboring european nations, such as the united kingdom, germany, and austria. among many popular brands, the most notable italian breweries are peroni and moretti. beer in italy is often drunk in pizzerias, and south tyrol (german-speaking region) is the area where beer is made and consumed the most.

other[edit]
 a bottle of homemade limoncello
there are also several other popular alcoholic drinks in italy. limoncello, a traditional lemon liqueur from sicily and southern italy (sorrento, amalfi and the gulf of naples) in general, is one of the most common.[95] made from lemon, it is an extremely strong drink which is usually consumed in very small proportions, in small glasses or cups.
amaro sicilianos are common sicilian digestifs, made with herbs, which are usually drunk after heavy meals. mirto, an herbal distillate made from the berries (red mirto) and leaves (white mirto) of the myrtle bush, is popular in sardinia and other regions. another well-known digestif is amaro lucano from basilicata.[96]
grappa is the typical alcoholic drink of northern italy, generally associated with the culture of the alps and of the po valley. the most famous grappas are distilled in friuli-venezia giulia, veneto, piedmont, and trentino. the three most notable and recognizable italian aperitifs are martini, vermouth, and campari. a sparkling drink which is becoming internationally popular as a less expensive substitute for french champagne is prosecco, from the veneto region.[97][98]

desserts[edit]
main article: list of italian desserts
see also: list of italian dishes—desserts and pastry
see also: sicilian cuisine—desserts and sweets
from the italian perspective, cookies and candy belong to the same category of sweets.[99] traditional candies include candied fruits, torrone, and nut brittles, all of which are still popular in the modern era. in medieval times, northern italy became so famous for the quality of its stiff fruit pastes (similar to marmalade or conserves, except stiff enough to mold into shapes) that "paste of genoa" became a generic name for high-quality fruit conserves.[100]
silver-coated almond dragées, which are called confetti, are thrown at weddings. the idea of including a romantic note with candy may have begun with italian dragées, no later than the early 19th century, and is carried on with the multilingual love notes included in boxes of italy's most famous chocolate, baci by perugina in milan.[101] the most significant chocolate style is a combination of hazelnuts and milk chocolate, which is featured in gianduja pastes like nutella, which is made by ferrero spa in alba, piedmont, as well as perugnia's baci and many other chocolate confections.[99]





panettone is a traditional christmas cake






gelato is italian ice cream






panna cotta with garnish






tiramisu with cocoa powder garnish






cannoli with pistachio, candied fruit, and chocolate chips




holiday cuisine[edit]
every region has its own holiday recipes. during la festa di san giuseppe (st. joseph's day) on 19 march, sicilians give thanks to st. joseph for preventing a famine during the middle ages.[102][103] the fava bean saved the population from starvation, and is a traditional part of st. joseph's day altars and traditions.[104] other customs celebrating this festival include wearing red clothing, eating sicilian pastries known as zeppole and giving food to the poor.
on easter sunday, lamb is served throughout italy. a typical easter sunday breakfast in umbria and tuscany includes salami, boiled eggs, wine, easter cakes, and pizza. the common cake for easter day is the colomba pasquale (literally, easter dove), which is often simply known as "italian easter cake" abroad. it is supposed to represent the dove, and is topped with almonds and pearl sugar.
on christmas eve a symbolic fast is observed with the cena di magro ("light dinner"), a meatless meal. typical cakes of the christmas season are panettone and pandoro.

abroad[edit]
this section needs additional citations for verification. please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed.find sources: "italian cuisine" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · jstor (december 2015) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
africa[edit]
due to several italian colonies established in africa, mainly in ethiopia, eritrea, libya, and somalia (except the northern part, which was under british rule), there is a considerable amount of italian influence on the cuisines of these nations.

libya[edit]
italy's legacy from the days when libya was invaded by italy can be seen in the popularity of pasta on its menus, particularly sharba, a highly spiced libyan soup. bazin, a local specialty, is a hard paste, made from barley, salt and water, and one of the most popular meals in the libyan cuisine is batata mubatana (filled potato). it consists of fried potato pieces filled with spiced minced meat and covered with egg and breadcrumbs.

south africa[edit]
all major cities and towns in south africa have substantial populations of italians. there are "italian clubs" in all main cities and they have had a significant influence on the cuisine of this country. italian foods, like ham and cheeses, are imported and some also made locally, and every city has a popular italian restaurant or two, as well as pizzerias. pastas are popular and is eaten more and more by south africans. the production of good quality olive oil is on the rise in south africa, especially in the drier south-western parts where there is a more mediterranean-type of rainfall pattern. some oils have even won top international awards.

europe[edit]
france[edit]
in france, the cuisine of corsica has much in common with the italian cuisine, since the island was from the early middle ages until 1768 first of a pisan and then a genoese possession. this is above all relevant by the first courses and by the charcuterie.

great britain[edit]
pizza and pasta dishes such as spaghetti bolognese and lasagne with bolognese ragù and béchamel sauce are the most popular forms of italian food in british, notably, english, cuisine.

slovenia[edit]
italian cuisine has had a strong influence on slovenian cuisine. for centuries, north-eastern italy and western slovenia have formed part of the same cultural-historical and geographical space. between 1918 and 1945, western slovenia (the slovenian littoral and part of inner carniola) were part of italy. in addition, an autochthonous italian minority live in slovenian istria.
for these reasons italian dishes have penetrated the local slovenian cuisine. furthermore, there are numerous typical dishes that are shared between the slovenian cuisines and the cuisine of the neighboring italian region of friuli venezia giulia: these include the gubana nut roll of friuli (known as guban'ca or potica in slovenia) and the jota stew.
among the slovenian dishes that come directly from italian cuisine, the gnocchi and some types of pasta are especially popular, as well as dishes like the minestrone (known as mineštra in slovene) or the frittata (known as frtalja in slovene).
prosciutto (pršut in slovenian) and polenta are also popular.

north and central america[edit]
canada and the usa[edit]
main article: italian-american cuisine
 an italian-american pizza with pepperoni (salami), mushrooms, olives and peppers
much of italian-american cuisine is based on that found in campania and sicily, heavily americanized to reflect ingredients and conditions found in the united states. most pizza eaten around the world derives ultimately from the neapolitan style, if somewhat thicker and usually with more toppings in terms of quantity.

mexico[edit]
throughout the country the "torta de milanesa" is a common item offered at food carts and stalls. it is a sandwich made from locally baked bread and contains a breaded, pan-fried cutlet of pork or beef. "pescado veracruzano" is a dish that originates from the port city of veracruz and features a fillet of fresh fish (usually gulf red snapper) covered in a distinctly mediterranean influenced sauce containing stewed tomatoes, garlic, green olives, and capers. also, "espagueti" (spaghetti) and other pastas are popular in a variety of soups.

south america[edit]
 "milanesa a la napolitana" with french fries, an italian-inspired dish based on the original cotoletta dish from milan, common in south america. this dish is called "parmegiana steak" in brazil, though it is not typical from parma region in italy but was actually invented in buenos aires.
argentina[edit]
due to large italian immigration to argentina, italian food and drink is heavily featured in argentine cuisine. an example could be milanesas (the name comes from the original cotoletta alla milanese from milan, italy) or breaded cutlets. pizza (locally pronounced pisa or pitsa), for example, has been wholly subsumed and in its argentine form more closely resembles italian calzones than it does its italian ancestor. there are several other italian-argentine dishes, such as sorrentinos and argentine gnocchi.

brazil[edit]
italian cuisine is popular in brazil, due to great immigration there in the late 1800s and early 1900s. due to the huge italian community, são paulo is the place where this cuisine is most appreciated. several types of pasta and meat, including milanesa steaks, have made their way into both daily home and street kitchens and fancy restaurants. the city has also developed its particular variety of pizza, different from both neapolitan and american varieties, and it is largely popular on weekend dinners. in rio de janeiro italian cuisine is also popular, and pizza has developed as a typical botequim counter snack.

venezuela[edit]
there is considerable italian influence in venezuelan cuisine. pan chabata, or venezuelan ciabatta, pan siciliano, sicilian bread, cannoli siciliano, sicilian cannoli, and the drink chinotto are examples of the italian influence in venezuelan food and beverages.


see also[edit]


italian cuisine portal
italy portal
food portal

il cucchiaio d'argento, an italian cookbook
il talismano della felicità by ada boni, an italian cookbook
italian food products
list of italian cheeses
list of italian dop cheeses
list of italian dishes
list of italian soups
list of italian restaurants
sammarinese cuisine
italian meal structure
italian wine

notes[edit]


^ "italian food  | italy". www.lifeinitaly.com. retrieved 2017-05-15..mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/65/lock-green.svg/9px-lock-green.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d6/lock-gray-alt-2.svg/9px-lock-gray-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/aa/lock-red-alt-2.svg/9px-lock-red-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration{color:#555}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration span{border-bottom:1px dotted;cursor:help}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/wikisource-logo.svg/12px-wikisource-logo.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output code.cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:inherit;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#33aa33;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-right{padding-right:0.2em}

^ "the making of italian food...from the beginning". epicurean.com. retrieved 24 april 2010.

^ del conte, 11-21.

^ related articles (2 january 2009). "italian cuisine". britannica online encyclopedia. britannica.com. retrieved 24 april 2010.

^ "italian food – italy's regional dishes & cuisine". indigoguide.com. archived from the original on 2 january 2011. retrieved 24 april 2010.

^ "regional italian cuisine". rusticocooking.com. retrieved 24 april 2010.

^ "how pasta became the world's favourite food". bbc. 15 june 2011. retrieved 28 september 2014.

^ freeman, nancy (2 march 2007). "american food, cuisine". sallybernstein.com. retrieved 24 april 2010.

^ the silver spoon isbn 88-7212-223-6, 1997 ed.

^ mario batali simple italian food: recipes from my two villages (1998), isbn 0-609-60300-0

^ "history of italian food". yourguidetoitaly.com.

^ first pizzeria was settled in naples

^ a b del conte, 11.

^ a b jenkins, nancy harmon (1989-10-18). "arab-sicilian food: tale of 1,001 years". the new york times. issn 0362-4331. retrieved 2017-05-03.

^ team, delicious italy. "arab culinary influence in sicilian food". retrieved 2017-05-03.

^ a b del conte, 12.

^ capatti, 253-254.

^ forever, italian. "reasons why northern italy has a german culture". 5amily. retrieved 2018-10-08.

^ capatti, 2-4.

^ capatti, 6.

^ capatti, 9–10.

^ capatti, 10.

^ del conte, 13.

^ a b c del conte, 14, 15.

^ a b del conte, 15.

^ de conte, 16

^ capatti, 158-159.

^ capatti, 282–284.

^ gentilcore, david (15 june 2010). pomodoro!: a history of the tomato in italy. columbia university press. p. x. isbn 978-0-231-15206-8. retrieved 24 february 2013.

^ de conte, 17

^ faccioli, 753

^ de conte, 18–19

^ bastianich, lidia; tania, manuali. lidia cooks from the heart of italy: a feast of 175 regional recipes (1st ed.).

^ bastianich, lidia; john, mariani. how italian food conquered the world (1st ed.).

^ conte, anna del (2016-05-16). "ten commandments of italian cooking". the guardian. issn 0261-3077. retrieved 2017-04-25.

^ kyle phillips. "northern regional cuisines". about.

^ may, tony (1 june 2005). italian cuisine: the new essential reference to the riches of the italian table. macmillan. pp. 7–. isbn 978-0-312-30280-1. retrieved 24 february 2013.

^ hazan, marcella (27 october 1992). "introduction". essentials of classic italian cooking (kindle and printed.) (1st ed.). knopf. isbn 978-0394584041. retrieved 2 november 2015. ...italian cooking? it would seem no single cuisine answers to that name. the cooking of italy is really the cooking of regions that long antedate the italian nation....

^ for further references: capatti, a.; montanari, m., italian cuisine: a cultural history, columbia university press, 2003 - http://blog.tuscany-cooking-class.com/regional-diversity-in-italian-cuisine/

^ inc., restaurant agent. "exploring italian cuisine: flavorful regions and a fresh perspective". tableagent.com. retrieved 2017-05-15.

^ a b piras, 319.

^ "abruzzo wine and food, tortoreto and abruzzo cooking – hotel poseidon tortoreto". archived from the original on 12 december 2013. retrieved 2016-08-15.

^ "italian wine regions". archived from the original on 8 february 2014.

^ "the best italian wine is trebbiano d'abruzzo 2007 by valentini, then barolo reserve monprivato cà d'morissio 2004 by mascarello and sassicaia 2009 by san guido estate. the "best italian wine awards-the 50 best wines of italy" - visualizzazione per stampa". winenews. 25 september 2012. archived from the original on 10 november 2014. retrieved 10 november 2014.

^ "tastes and colours of lucanian cuisine". basilicataturistica.com. archived from the original on 8 december 2014. retrieved 5 december 2014.

^ "certificazione di origine, i meccanismi di vigilanza" (pdf). consiglio.basilicata.it (in italian and english). retrieved 3 january 2015.

^ zanini de vita, oretta (2009). encyclopedia of pasta. university of california press. p. 267. isbn 978-0-520-25522-7. retrieved 20 april 2016.

^ "lagane with chick peas". basilicatacultural.ca. retrieved 4 january 2015.

^ riley, gillian (2007). the oxford companion to italian food. oxford university press. p. 44.

^ "basilicata - on the waterways: basilicata land of mefitis". expo2015.org. retrieved 26 march 2016.

^ edward lear, diario di un viaggio a piedi – calabria 1847, edizione italiana a cura di parallelo 38, reggio calabria, 1973

^ piras, 401.

^ a b piras, 337.

^ hanna miller archived 12 july 2009 at the wayback machine "american pie," american heritage, april/may 2006.

^ piras, 187.

^ a b piras, 167, 177.

^ a b piras, 291.

^ a b piras, 87.

^ piras, 273

^ [1] provvedimento 15 febbraio 2006: iscrizione della denominazione «oliva ascolana del piceno» nel registro delle denominazioni di origine protette e delle indicazioni geografiche protette, guri n. 46

^ a b c d davide paolini,prodotti tipici d'italia, garzanti.

^ piras, 361.

^ shulman, martha (22 july 2008). "pasta with cherry tomatoes and arugula". new york times. retrieved 1 october 2011.

^ a b piras, 457, 460.

^ "casu frazigu – formaggi" (pdf) (in italian). regione autonoma della sardegna – ersat: ente regionale di sviluppo e assistenza tecnica. retrieved 29 october 2010.

^ a b piras, 423.

^ team, delicious italy. "arab culinary influence in sicilian food". retrieved 2017-05-10.

^ greatbritishchefs. "sicily's north african influences - great italian chefs". great italian chefs. retrieved 2017-05-10.

^ "the marsala wine: an english story with a sicilian flavour  | italian food excellence". italian food excellence. 2014-05-15. retrieved 2017-05-10.

^ "what is marsala wine | wine folly". wine folly. 2014-08-08. retrieved 2017-05-10.

^ a b piras, 67.

^ piras, 221–239.

^ reference: maxwell, v.; leviton, a.; pettersen, l.; tuscany and umbria, lonely planet, 2010. for the richness of umbrian cuisine and its history: http://blog.tuscany-cooking-class.com/etruscan-roots-beyond-tuscany-umbrian-cuisine/.

^ piras, 255, 256, 260, 261.

^ piras, 123, 124, 128, 133.

^ inc., restaurant agent. "exploring italian cuisine: flavorful regions and a fresh perspective". tableagent.com. retrieved 2017-05-15.

^ piras, 33.

^ "venice cuisine – by food author howard hillman". hillmanwonders.com. archived from the original on 11 june 2008. retrieved 4 april 2010.

^ "history of tiramisu". archived from the original on 4 june 2012. retrieved 16 august 2010.

^ "guide to the traditional italian meal structure". cucina toscana. 2015-09-22. retrieved 2017-05-15.

^ "at the italian dinner table | italian dinner and food traditions". delallo. retrieved 2017-05-15.

^ evans, 198-200.

^ a b c d evans, 200.

^ a b evans, 201.

^ a b evans, 203

^ evans, 203.

^ evans, 204.

^ evans, 205

^ evans, 205.

^ piras, 300.

^ piras, 301.

^ koplan, 301.

^ koplan, 311.

^ koplan, 307-308.

^ forever, cooking. "fun facts about italy's famous limoncello". 5amily. retrieved 2018-10-24.

^ piras, 383.

^ atkin, tim, the observer (11 november 2007). "the fizz that's the bizz". the guardian. london. retrieved 29 december 2008.

^ dane, ana, thestreet.com (3 july 2006). "pop the cork on prosecco". retrieved 29 december 2008.

^ a b richardson, tim h. (2002). sweets: a history of candy. bloomsbury usa. pp. 364–365. isbn 1-58234-229-6.

^ richardson, tim h. (2002). sweets: a history of candy. bloomsbury usa. p. 119. isbn 1-58234-229-6.

^ richardson, tim h. (2002). sweets: a history of candy. bloomsbury usa. p. 210. isbn 1-58234-229-6.

^ long, c.m. (2001). spiritual merchants: religion, magic, and commerce. university of tennessee press. p. 67. isbn 978-1-57233-110-5.

^ ball, a. (2003). encyclopedia of catholic devotions and practices. our sunday visitor. p. 579. isbn 978-0-87973-910-2.

^ canatella, r. (2011). the yat language of new orleans. iuniverse. pp. 131–132. isbn 978-1-4620-3295-2. retrieved 11 december 2015.


references[edit]
capatti, alberto and montanari, massimo. italian cuisine: a cultural history. new york: columbia university press, 2003. isbn 0-231-12232-2.
del conte, anna. the concise gastronomy of italy. usa: barnes and noble books, 2004. isbn 1-86205-662-5.
dickie, john, delizia! the epic history of italians and their food (new york, 2008).
evans, matthew; cossi, gabriella; d'onghia, peter, world food italy. ca: lonely planet publications pty ltd, 2000. isbn 1-86450-022-0.
faccioli, emilio. l'arte della cucina in italia. milano: einaudi, 1987 (in italian).
hazan, marcella, essentials of classic italian cooking, alfred a. knopf (27 october 1992), hardcover, 704 pages, isbn 978-0394584041.
koplan, steven; smith, brian h.; weiss, michael a.; exploring wine, new york: van nostrand reinhold, 1996. isbn 0-471-35295-0.
piras, claudia and medagliani, eugenio. culinaria italy. cologne: könemann verlagsgesellschaft mbh, 2000. isbn 3-8290-2901-2.
further reading[edit]
riley, gillian (2007). the oxford companion to italian food. oxford university press. isbn 978-0-19-860617-8.
the italian academy of cuisine (accademia italiana della cucina) (2009). la cucina: the regional cooking of italy. trans. jay hyams. new york: rizzoli. isbn 978-0-8478-3147-0. oclc 303040489. the longest and most extensive italian cookbook with over 2000 recipes, including background information regarding each recipe.
thoms, ulrike: from migrant food to lifestyle cooking: the career of italian cuisine in europe, european history online, mainz: institute of european history, 2011, retrieved: 22 june 2011.
external links[edit]



wikibooks cookbook has a recipe/module on

 cuisine of italy
 italian cooking




wikimedia commons has media related to cuisine of italy.



wikivoyage has a travel guide for cuisine of italy.
italian food - world's most influential food. thrillist
vtecuisine of italyhistory
ancient roman cuisine
medieval cuisine
early modern cuisine
contemporary cuisine
regional cuisines
arbëreshë cuisine
lombard cuisine
neapolitan cuisine
roman cuisine
sicilian cuisine
venetian cuisine
pasta and sauces
pasta (list)
carbonara
pesto
ragù
neapolitan ragù
arrabbiata sauce
amatriciana sauce
marinara sauce
genovese sauce
bolognese sauce
checca sauce
pasta alla norma
pasta e fagioli
pasta al pomodoro
pasta primavera
rigatoni con la pajata
cacio e pepe
spaghetti aglio e olio
spaghetti alla puttanesca
spaghetti alle vongole
soups
soup alla canavese
soup alla modenese
soup all'imperatrice
acquacotta
bagnun
minestrone
ribollita
other dishes (list)
bagna càuda
braciola
bruschetta
cotoletta
crostino
bollito misto
baccalà alla vicentina
cacciatore
cacciucco
caponata
cappon magro
caprese salad
carciofi alla romana
carpaccio
carne pizzaiola
cassoeula
ciambotta
ciccioli
coda alla vaccinara
fiorentina
fondue
frico
frittata
frìttuli
istrian stew
lampredotto
polenta
porchetta
panzanella
parmigiana
ossobuco
orzotto
risotto
rollatini
saltimbocca
scaloppine
timballo
vitello tonnato
pizza and street food
pizza
al taglio
sicilian pizza
focaccia
piscialandrea
calzone
panzerotti
crocchè
arancini
supplì
frittula
panelle
pani câ meusa
panino
piadina
arrosticini
farinata
tramezzino
zippuli
sardenara
cheeses and charcuterie
cheeses
pdo
salumi
pastry and desserts (list)
bocconotto
bombolone
bruttiboni
buccellato
budino
cannoli
cantuccini
cassata
castagnaccio
cavallucci
colomba di pasqua
crostata
crocetta of caltanissetta
gelato
granita
grattachecca
marzipan
mustacciuoli
pandoro
panettone
panforte
panna cotta
panpepato
parrozzo
pastiera
pignolata
pizzelle
ricciarelli
seada
semifreddo
sfogliatelle
sorbetto
sponge cake
spumoni
struffoli
tartufo
tiramisu
torrone
torta caprese
zabaione
zeppole
zuccotto
zuppa inglese
breads
borlengo
breadstick
ciabatta
coppia ferrarese
filone
michetta
pane carasau
pane di altamura
pane sciocco
sgabeo
taralli
vastedda
wines
varieties
igt
docg
doc
abruzzo
calabrian
friulan
lombardy
piedmont
tuscan
veneto
alcoholic beverages
beer
grappa
sambuca
mirto
vermouth
spritz
limoncello
fernet
campari
aperol
cynar
amaro
amaretto
nocino
centerbe
bargnolino
maraschino
sassolino
strega
rosolio
galliano
frangelico
alchermes
aurum
coffee
caffè
espresso
lungo
ristretto
doppio
espressino
cappuccino
caffelatte
latte macchiato
caffè macchiato
caffè corretto
affogato
mocaccino
marocchino
bicerin
barbajada
bombardino
see also
sammarinese cuisine
italian-american cuisine
italian food products
osteria
trattoria
enoteca
sagra
list of italian chefs
list of italian dishes
meal structure

 italian cuisine portal
 italy portal
 food portal

vtecuisinesregional
african
north
west
list
americas
north
south
list
asian
central
indian subcontinent
list
caribbean
caucasian
european
central
eastern
list
global
latin american
mediterranean
middle eastern
levantine
oceanic
national
afghan
albanian
algerian
angolan
argentine
armenian
australian
austrian
azerbaijani
bahraini
bangladeshi
barbadian
belarusian
belgian
belizean
beninese
bhutanese
bolivian
bosnia and herzegovina
botswana
brazilian
british
cornish
english
northern irish
scottish
welsh
bruneian
bulgarian
burkinabé
burmese
burundian
cambodian
cameroonian
canadian
canadian chinese
quebec
central african republic
chadian
chilean
chinese
tibetan
colombian
congolese
croatian
cuban
cypriot
czech
danish
faroese
greenlandic
djiboutian
dominican
dominican republic
dutch
east timorese
ecuadorian
egyptian
emirati
equatorial guinean
eritrean
estonian
ethiopian
fijian
filipino
finnish
french
occitania
gabonese
gambian
georgian
german
ghanaian
greek
greek macedonian
guatemalan
guianan
guinea-bissauan
guinean
haitian
honduran
hong kong
hungarian
icelandic
indian
andhra pradesh
arunachal pradesh
assam
bihar
goa
gujarat
himachal pradesh
kashmir
jharkhand
karnataka
kerala
maharashtra
manipur
meghalaya
mizoram
nagaland
odisha
punjab
rajasthan
sikkim
sindhi
tamil nadu
indonesian
iranian
iraqi
irish
israeli
italian
sicilian
ivorian (côte d'ivoire)
jamaican
japanese
jordanian
kazakh
kenyan
korean
north korean
kosovan
kuwaiti
kyrgyz
lao
latvian
lebanese
lesotho
liberian
libyan
liechtensteiner
lithuanian
luxembourg
macau
north macedonian
malagasy
malawian
malaysian
malay
chinese
indian
eurasian
sabahan
sarawakian
maldivian
malian
maltese
mauritanian
mauritian
mexican
moldovan
monégasque
mongolian
montenegrin
moroccan
mozambican
namibian
nauruan
nepalese
new zealand
nigerian
nigerien
norwegian
niuean
omani
pakistani
palestinian
panamanian
peruvian
chinese
polish
portuguese
qatari
romanian
russian
rwandan
salvadoran
saint helena
saint lucian
sammarinese
são tomé and príncipe
saudi arabian
senegalese
serbian
seychelles
sierra leonean
singaporean
slovak
slovenian
somali
south african
spanish
andalusian
asturian
basque
catalan
galician
valencian
sri lankan
sudanese
swazi
swedish
swiss
syrian
taiwanese
tajik
tanzanian
thai
togolese
tunisian
turkish
trinidadian and tobagonian
ugandan
ukrainian
united states
california cuisine
hawaiian
new american
puerto rican
soul food
uruguayan
uzbek
venezuelan
vietnamese
vatican
western saharan
yemeni
zambian
zimbabwean
ethnic and religious
ainu
american chinese
anglo-indian
arab
assyrian
balochi
balinese
batak
bengali
berber
betawi
buddhist
cajun
cantonese
chechen
chinese indonesian
chinese islamic
christian
circassian
crimean tatar
greek american
hindu
inuit
italian american
jain
javanese
jewish
sephardic
mizrahi
american
bukharan
syrian
komi
kurdish
livonian
louisiana creole
malay
manado
maharashtrian
mordovian
native american
okinawan
ossetian
padang
parsi
pashtun
pennsylvania dutch
peranakan
punjabi
sami
sikh
sindhi
soul food
sundanese
tatar
udmurt
yamal
yup'ik
zanzibari
historical
ancient egyptian
ancient greek
ancient israelite
ancient roman
aztec
byzantine
early modern european
historical chinese
historical indian subcontinent
history of seafood
history of vegetarianism
inca
mayan
medieval
ottoman
peasant
soviet
thirteen colonies
styles
cuisine classique
fast food
fusion
haute
molecular gastronomy
note by note
nouvelle
lists
list of cuisines
lists of prepared foods

 cuisines portal
 food portal
 drink portal
 category
 commons
 cookbook
 wikiproject
 outline

vteeuropean cuisinesovereign stateseuropean union
austria
belgium
bulgaria
croatia
cyprus
czech republic
denmark
estonia
finland
france
germany
greece
hungary
republic of ireland
italy
latvia
lithuania
luxembourg
malta
netherlands
poland
portugal
romania
slovakia
slovenia
spain
sweden
united kingdom
other
albania
andorra
armenia
azerbaijan
belarus
bosnia and herzegovina
georgia
iceland
kazakhstan
liechtenstein
north macedonia
moldova
monaco
montenegro
norway
russia
san marino
serbia
switzerland
turkey
ukraine
vatican city
states with limitedrecognition
abkhazia
kosovo
nagorno-karabakh
northern cyprus
south ossetia
transnistria
dependencies andother territories
faroe islands
gibraltar
guernsey
isle of man
jersey

vtemediterranean cuisineregionssouthernmaghreb
regional
couscous
algeria
chakhchoukha
libya
bazin
morocco
méchoui
tagine
tunisia
shakshouka
egypt
duqqa
ful medames
kushari
mulukhiyah
levant
regional
baba ghanoush
hummus
tabbouleh
israel
hamin
lebanon
kibbeh
palestine
musakhan
syria
apricot paste
northernottoman
regional
coffee
pita
shish kebab
yogurt
balkan
jota
cyprus
halloumi
greece
kleftiko
moussaka
turkey
börek
italian
regional
pasta
pizza
liguria
ciuppin
focaccia
pesto
ravioli
abruzzo
gnocchi
naples
neapolitan ragù
pasta e fagioli
rome
carbonara
tuscany
ribollita
sicily
caponata
marsala
pasta alla norma
scaccia
veneto
polenta
risotto
french
corsica
capicollu
occitan
cassoulet
provence
bouillabaisse
ratatouille
salade niçoise
spanish
andalusia
gazpacho
sherry
balearics
caldereta
tombet
catalonia
escalivada
escudella
ollada
valencia
paella
other
gibraltar
malta
monaco
staples
wheat
bread
couscous
pasta
pizza
semolina
olive
olive oil
grape
wine
shared
bottarga
lamb
anise spirits
exemplars
elizabeth david
a book of mediterranean food
 mediterranean cuisine portal •   category: mediterranean cuisine
vteitaly articleshistorychronology
prehistory
italic peoples
ancient peoples of italy
pre-nuragic sardinia
nuragic peoples
etruscan civilization
nuragic civilization
phoenician/carthaginian colonies
magna graecia
ancient rome
kingdom
republic
empire
middle ages
italy under odoacer
ostrogoths
byzantium
lombards
the holy roman empire
the sardinian judicates
arabs
normans
guelphs and ghibellines
the italian city-states
the maritime republics
renaissance
italian wars
early modern period
unification
revolutions of 1820
revolutions of 1830
revolutions of 1848
sicilian revolution of 1848
first war of independence
crimean war
second war of independence
expedition of the thousand
third war of independence
capture of rome
monarchy and the world wars
kingdom of italy
colonial empire
world war i
fascist italy
world war ii
resistance
civil war
republic
economic boom
years of lead
years of mud
mani pulite
by topic
citizenship
currency
economy
fashion
flags
genetic
historic states
military
music
postal
railways
geography
peninsula
northern
northwest
northeast
central
southern
south
insular
climate
fauna
flora
mountains
prealps
alps
apennines
volcanology
volcanoes
beaches
canals
caves
earthquakes
islands
lakes
national parks
rivers
valleys
politics
constitution
elections
referendums
foreign relations
missions
judiciary
law enforcement
military
parliament
chamber of deputies
senate
political parties
president
prime minister
council of ministers
regions
provinces
metropolitan cities
comune
municipalities
cities
economy
economic history
milan
naples
rome
turin
regions by gdp
automotive industry
banking
central bank
companies
energy
government debt
science and technology
stock exchange
taxation
telecommunications
internet
tourism
trade unions
transportation
welfare
society
abortion
adoption
billionaires
capital punishment
corruption
crime
demographics
education
secondary
higher
universities
emigration
fathers' rights movement
feminism
gambling
health
healthcare
immigration
lgbt rights
nobility
prostitution
racism
religion
smoking
social class
terrorism
women
culture
duecento
trecento
quattrocento
cinquecento
seicento
settecento
architecture
art
castles
cinema
cuisine
beer
wine
cultural icons
decorations
design
fashion
festivals
folklore
italian language
regional italian
italian literature
italophilia
italophobia
languages
media
newspapers
radio
tv
monuments
music
classical
folk
opera
popular
mythology
national symbols
anthem
emblem
flag
regions
national monument
personification
people
philosophy
public holidays
festa della repubblica
sculpture
sport
traditions
world heritage sites

 italy portal
 category
 commons
 news
quotes
travel
 wikiproject

authority control 
bnf: cb11964904x (data)
lccn: sh85031842
ndl: 00564306




 
						retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=italian_cuisine&oldid=883110154"					
categories: italian cuisinehidden categories: cs1 italian-language sources (it)webarchive template wayback linksuse dmy dates from may 2015articles needing additional references from october 2015all articles needing additional referencesall articles with unsourced statementsarticles with unsourced statements from march 2010articles with unsourced statements from october 2015articles needing additional references from december 2015commons category link is on wikidatawikipedia articles with bnf identifierswikipedia articles with lccn identifierswikipedia articles with ndl identifiers 



navigation menu


personal tools

not logged intalkcontributionscreate accountlog in 



namespaces

articletalk 




variants







views

readeditview history 



more





search



 







navigation


main pagecontentsfeatured contentcurrent eventsrandom articledonate to wikipediawikipedia store 



interaction


helpabout wikipediacommunity portalrecent changescontact page 



tools


what links hererelated changesupload filespecial pagespermanent linkpage informationwikidata itemcite this page 



print/export


create a bookdownload as pdfprintable version 



in other projects


wikimedia commonswikivoyage 



languages


العربيةazərbaycancaбеларускаяcatalàčeštinadeutscheestiελληνικάespañolesperantoeuskarafrançaisgalego한국어հայերենhrvatskibahasa indonesiaitalianoעבריתbasa jawaಕನ್ನಡkurdîlietuviųmagyarмакедонскиbahasa melayunederlands日本語napulitanonorsknorsk nynorskpolskiportuguêsрусскийsimple englishslovenčinaсрпски / srpskisuomisvenskatagalogతెలుగుไทยtürkçeукраїнськаtiếng việt中文 
edit links 





 this page was last edited on 13 february 2019, at 10:00 (utc).
text is available under the creative commons attribution-sharealike license;
additional terms may apply.  by using this site, you agree to the terms of use and privacy policy. wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the wikimedia foundation, inc., a non-profit organization.


privacy policy
about wikipedia
disclaimers
contact wikipedia
developers
cookie statement
mobile view



 

 



(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgpageparsereport":{"limitreport":{"cputime":"2.644","walltime":"3.199","ppvisitednodes":{"value":24094,"limit":1000000},"ppgeneratednodes":{"value":0,"limit":1500000},"postexpandincludesize":{"value":393619,"limit":2097152},"templateargumentsize":{"value":33469,"limit":2097152},"expansiondepth":{"value":15,"limit":40},"expensivefunctioncount":{"value":53,"limit":500},"unstrip-depth":{"value":1,"limit":20},"unstrip-size":{"value":188400,"limit":5000000},"entityaccesscount":{"value":3,"limit":400},"timingprofile":["100.00% 2015.585      1 -total"," 34.35%  692.330      1 template:reflist"," 30.63%  617.393     14 template:navbox"," 14.57%  293.693     24 template:cite_web"," 13.09%  263.811      1 template:european_topic","  7.79%  157.081     55 template:iso2country","  6.19%  124.697     11 template:cite_news","  5.92%  119.309     14 template:cite_book","  5.01%  101.035      3 template:citation_needed","  4.71%   94.968      2 template:ambox"]},"scribunto":{"limitreport-timeusage":{"value":"0.863","limit":"10.000"},"limitreport-memusage":{"value":13848835,"limit":52428800},"limitreport-logs":"table#1 {\n  [\"size\"] = \"tiny\",\n}\ntable#1 {\n  [\"size\"] = \"tiny\",\n}\ntable#1 {\n  [\"size\"] = \"tiny\",\n}\ntable#1 {\n  [\"size\"] = \"tiny\",\n}\ntable#1 {\n  [\"size\"] = \"tiny\",\n}\ntable#1 {\n  [\"size\"] = \"tiny\",\n}\ntable#1 {\n  [\"size\"] = \"tiny\",\n}\ntable#1 {\n  [\"size\"] = \"tiny\",\n}\ntable#1 {\n  [\"size\"] = \"tiny\",\n}\n"},"cachereport":{"origin":"mw1241","timestamp":"20190219144839","ttl":2073600,"transientcontent":false}}});});
{"@context":"https:\/\/schema.org","@type":"article","name":"italian cuisine","url":"https:\/\/en.wikipedia.org\/wiki\/italian_cuisine","sameas":"http:\/\/www.wikidata.org\/entity\/q192786","mainentity":"http:\/\/www.wikidata.org\/entity\/q192786","author":{"@type":"organization","name":"contributors to wikimedia projects"},"publisher":{"@type":"organization","name":"wikimedia foundation, inc.","logo":{"@type":"imageobject","url":"https:\/\/www.wikimedia.org\/static\/images\/wmf-hor-googpub.png"}},"datepublished":"2006-01-16t03:03:49z","datemodified":"2019-02-13t10:00:48z","image":"https:\/\/upload.wikimedia.org\/wikipedia\/commons\/0\/06\/italian_delicacies.jpg","headline":"cuisine originating from italy"}
(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgbackendresponsetime":3393,"wghostname":"mw1241"});});


