



italian wine - wikipedia
document.documentelement.classname = document.documentelement.classname.replace( /(^|\s)client-nojs(\s|$)/, "$1client-js$2" );
(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgcanonicalnamespace":"","wgcanonicalspecialpagename":false,"wgnamespacenumber":0,"wgpagename":"italian_wine","wgtitle":"italian wine","wgcurrevisionid":882802972,"wgrevisionid":882802972,"wgarticleid":1807097,"wgisarticle":true,"wgisredirect":false,"wgaction":"view","wgusername":null,"wgusergroups":["*"],"wgcategories":["cs1 maint: archived copy as title","pages containing links to subscription-only content","cs1 italian-language sources (it)","all articles with unsourced statements","articles with unsourced statements from august 2018","italian wine"],"wgbreakframes":false,"wgpagecontentlanguage":"en","wgpagecontentmodel":"wikitext","wgseparatortransformtable":["",""],"wgdigittransformtable":["",""],"wgdefaultdateformat":"dmy","wgmonthnames":["","january","february","march","april","may","june","july","august","september","october","november","december"],"wgmonthnamesshort":["","jan","feb","mar","apr","may","jun","jul","aug","sep","oct","nov","dec"],"wgrelevantpagename":"italian_wine","wgrelevantarticleid":1807097,"wgrequestid":"xgfrxgpaaeeaaj51zwcaaaan","wgcspnonce":false,"wgisprobablyeditable":true,"wgrelevantpageisprobablyeditable":true,"wgrestrictionedit":[],"wgrestrictionmove":[],"wgflaggedrevsparams":{"tags":{}},"wgstablerevisionid":null,"wgcategorytreepagecategoryoptions":"{\"mode\":0,\"hideprefix\":20,\"showcount\":true,\"namespaces\":false}","wgwikieditorenabledmodules":[],"wgbetafeaturesfeatures":[],"wgmediavieweronclick":true,"wgmediaviewerenabledbydefault":true,"wgpopupsshouldsendmoduletouser":true,"wgpopupsconflictswithnavpopupgadget":false,"wgvisualeditor":{"pagelanguagecode":"en","pagelanguagedir":"ltr","pagevariantfallbacks":"en","usepageimages":true,"usepagedescriptions":true},"wgmfispagecontentmodeleditable":true,"wgmfexpandallsectionsuseroption":true,"wgmfenablefontchanger":true,"wgmfdisplaywikibasedescriptions":{"search":true,"nearby":true,"watchlist":true,"tagline":false},"wgrelatedarticles":null,"wgrelatedarticlesusecirrussearch":true,"wgrelatedarticlesonlyusecirrussearch":false,"wgwmeschemaeditattemptstepoversample":false,"wgpoweredbyhhvm":true,"wgulscurrentautonym":"english","wgnoticeproject":"wikipedia","wgcentralnoticecookiestodelete":[],"wgcentralnoticecategoriesusinglegacy":["fundraising","fundraising"],"wgwikibaseitemid":"q1125341","wgscorenotelanguages":{"arabic":"العربية","catalan":"català","deutsch":"deutsch","english":"english","espanol":"español","italiano":"italiano","nederlands":"nederlands","norsk":"norsk","portugues":"português","suomi":"suomi","svenska":"svenska","vlaams":"west-vlams"},"wgscoredefaultnotelanguage":"nederlands","wgcentralauthmobiledomain":false,"wgcodemirrorenabled":true,"wgvisualeditortoolbarscrolloffset":0,"wgvisualeditorunsupportededitparams":["undo","undoafter","veswitched"],"wgeditsubmitbuttonlabelpublish":true,"oreswikiid":"enwiki","oresbaseurl":"http://ores.discovery.wmnet:8081/","oresapiversion":3});mw.loader.state({"ext.gadget.charinsert-styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site.styles":"ready","site.styles":"ready","noscript":"ready","user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site":"ready","user":"ready","user.options":"ready","user.tokens":"loading","ext.cite.styles":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.shared":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.commonprint":"ready","mediawiki.toc.styles":"ready","wikibase.client.init":"ready","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.noscript":"ready","ext.uls.interlanguage":"ready","ext.wikimediabadges":"ready","ext.3d.styles":"ready","mediawiki.skinning.interface":"ready","skins.vector.styles":"ready"});mw.loader.implement("user.tokens@0tffind",function($,jquery,require,module){/*@nomin*/mw.user.tokens.set({"edittoken":"+\\","patroltoken":"+\\","watchtoken":"+\\","csrftoken":"+\\"});
});rlpagemodules=["ext.cite.ux-enhancements","ext.scribunto.logs","site","mediawiki.page.startup","mediawiki.page.ready","mediawiki.toc","mediawiki.searchsuggest","ext.gadget.teahouse","ext.gadget.referencetooltips","ext.gadget.watchlist-notice","ext.gadget.drn-wizard","ext.gadget.charinsert","ext.gadget.reftoolbar","ext.gadget.extra-toolbar-buttons","ext.gadget.switcher","ext.centralauth.centralautologin","mmv.head","mmv.bootstrap.autostart","ext.popups","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.init","ext.visualeditor.targetloader","ext.eventlogging","ext.wikimediaevents","ext.navigationtiming","ext.uls.eventlogger","ext.uls.init","ext.uls.compactlinks","ext.uls.interface","ext.quicksurveys.init","ext.centralnotice.geoip","ext.centralnotice.startup","skins.vector.js"];mw.loader.load(rlpagemodules);});























 





italian wine 
from wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 jump to navigation
jump to search
 a typical italian vineyard scene, with vines growing together with olive trees.
italy is the world's largest producer of wine, and is home to some of the oldest wine-producing regions. its contribution is about 45–50 million hl per year, and represents about a quarter of global production.[1] italian wine is exported around the world, as popular among italians. italians rank fifth on the world wine consumption list by volume with 42 litres per capita consumption. grapes are grown in every region of the country and there are more than one million vineyards under cultivation.
etruscans and greek settlers produced wine in italy before the romans planted their own vineyards in the 2nd century bc. the romans greatly increased italy's area under vine using efficient viticultural and winemaking methods, and pioneered large-scale production and storage techniques such as barrel-making and bottling.[2]

contents

1 history
2 italian appellation system
3 geographical characteristics
4 italian wine regions
5 italian grape varieties

5.1 bianco (white)
5.2 rosso (red)


6 super tuscans
7 wine guides
8 vino cotto and vincotto
9 see also
10 references
11 further reading
12 external links


history[edit]
 vineyards around the town of barolo.
although vines had been cultivated from the wild vitis vinifera grape for millennia, it was not until the greek colonization that wine-making flourished. viticulture was introduced into sicily and southern italy by the mycenaean greeks,[3] and was well established when the extensive greek colonization transpired around 800 bc.[4][5] it was during the roman defeat of the carthaginians (acknowledged masters of wine-making) in the 2nd century bc that italian wine production began to further flourish. large-scale, slave-run plantations sprang up in many coastal areas and spread to such an extent that, in ad 92, emperor domitian was forced to destroy a great number of vineyards in order to free up fertile land for food production.
during this time, viticulture outside of italy was prohibited under roman law. exports to the provinces were reciprocated in exchange for more slaves, especially from gaul. trade was intense with gaul, according to pliny, because the inhabitants tended to drink italian wine unmixed and without restraint.[6] although unpalatable to adults, it was customary, at the time, for young people to drink wine mixed with a good proportion of water.
as the laws on provincial viticulture were relaxed, vast vineyards began to flourish in the rest of europe, especially gaul (present day france) and hispania. this coincided with the cultivation of new vines, such as biturica, an ancestor of the cabernets. these vineyards became so successful that italy ultimately became an import centre for provincial wines.[2]
depending on the vintage, modern italy is the world's largest or second largest wine producer. in 2005, production was about 20% of the global total, second only to france, which produced 26%. in the same year, italy's share in dollar value of table wine imports into the u.s. was 32%, australia's was 24%, and france's was 20%. along with australia, italy's market share has rapidly increased in recent years.[7]

italian appellation system[edit]
in 1963, the first official italian system of classification of wines was launched. since then, several modifications and additions to the legislation have been made, including a major modification in 1992. the last modification, which occurred in 2010, established four basic categories which are consistent with the latest european union wine regulations (2008–09). the categories, from the bottom to the top level, are:

vini (wines - informally called 'generic wines'): wines can be produced anywhere in the territory of the eu, label includes no indication of geographical origin of the grape varieties used or the vintage. (the label only reports the colour of the wine.)
vini varietali (varietal wines): generic wines that are made either mostly (at least 85%) from one kind of authorized 'international' grape variety (cabernet franc, cabernet sauvignon, chardonnay, merlot, sauvignon blanc, syrah) or entirely from two or more of them, grape variety or varieties and vintage may be indicated on the label. (the prohibition to indicate the geographical origin is instead maintained. these wines can be produced anywhere in the territory of the eu.)
vini igp (wines with protected geographical indication also traditionally implemented in italy as igt - typical geographical indication): wines produced in a specific territory within italy and following a series of specific and precise regulations on authorized varieties, viticultural and vinification practices, organoleptic and chemico-physical characteristics, labeling instructions, etc. currently (2016) there exist 118 igps/igts.
vini dop (wines with protected designation of origin): this category includes two sub-categories: vini doc (controlled designation of origin) and vini docg (controlled and guaranteed designation of origin). doc wines must have been igp wines for at least 5 years. they generally come from smaller regions within a certain igp territory that are particularly vocated for their climatic and geological characteristics, quality, and originality of local winemaking traditions. they also must follow stricter production regulations than igp wines. a doc wine can be promoted to docg if it has been a doc for at least 10 years. in addition to fulfilling the requisites for doc wines, docg wines must pass stricter analyses prior to commercialization, including a tasting by a specifically appointed committee. docg wines must also demonstrate a superior commercial success. currently (2016) there exist 332 docs and 73 docgs for a total of 405 dops.
a number of sub-categories exist pertaining to the regulation of sparkling wine production (e.g. vino spumante, vino spumante di qualità, vino spumante di qualità di tipo aromatico, vino frizzante).
within the dop category, 'classico' is a wine produced in the original historic centre of the protected territory. 'superiore' is a wine with at least 0.5 more alc%/vol than its corresponding regular dop wine and produced using a smaller allowed quantity of grapes per hectare, generally yielding a higher quality. 'riserva' is a wine that has been aged for a minimum period of time. the length of time varies with  (red, white, traditional-method sparkling, charmat-method sparkling). sometimes, 'classico' or 'superiore' are themselves part of the name of the dop (e.g. chianti classico docg or soave superiore docg).
the italian ministry of agriculture (mipaaf) regularly publishes updates to the official classification.[8][9]
it is important to note that looser regulations do not necessarily correspond to lower quality. in fact, many igp wines are actually high quality wines. talented winemakers sometimes wish to create wines using varietals or varietal percentages that do not match doc or docg requirements. "super tuscans", for example, are generally high quality wines that carry the igp designation. there are several other igp wines of superior quality, as well.
unlike france, italy has never had an official classification of its best 'crus'. private initiatives like the comitato grandi cru d'italia (committee of the grand crus of italy) and the instituto del vino italiano di qualità—grandi marchi (institute of quality italian wine—great brands) each gather a selection of renowned top italian wine producers, in an attempt to unofficially represent the italian wine excellence.
in 2007 the barbaresco consorzio was the first to introduce the menzioni geografiche aggiuntive (additional geographic mentions) also known as mega or subzones. sixty-five subzone vineyard areas were identified in 2007 and one additional subzone was approved in 2010, bringing the final number to 66.[10] the main goal was to put official boundaries to some of the most storied crus in order to protect them from unjustified expansion and exploitation.[10]
the barolo consorzio followed suit in 2010 with 181 mega, of which 170 were vineyard areas and 11 were village designations.[10] following the introductions of mega for barbaresco and barolo the term vigna (italian for vineyard) can be used on labels after its respective mega and only if the vineyard is within one of the approved official geographic mentions.[10]
the official introduction of subzones is strongly advocated by some for different denominations, but so far barolo and barbaresco are the only ones to have them.[11]

geographical characteristics[edit]
 tuscan wine
important wine-relevant geographic characteristics of italy include:

the extensive latitudinal range of the country permits wine growing from the alps in the north to almost-within-sight of africa in the south.
the fact that italy is a peninsula with a long shoreline contributes moderating climate effects to coastal wine regions.
italy's mountainous and hilly terrain provides a variety of altitudes and climate and soil conditions for grape growing.
italian wine regions[edit]
italy's twenty wine regions correspond to the twenty administrative regions of the country. understanding the differences between these regions is very helpful in understanding the different types of italian wine. wine in italy tends to reflect the local cuisine. regional cuisine also influences the wine.
the 73 docg wines are located in 15 different regions but most of them are concentrated in piedmont, lombardia, veneto and tuscany. among these are appellations appreciated and sought after by wine lovers around the world: barolo, barbaresco, and brunello di montalcino (colloquially known as the "killer b's"). other notable wines that have gained attention in recent years in the international markets and among specialists are: amarone della valpolicella, prosecco di conegliano- valdobbiadene, taurasi from campania, franciacorta sparkling wines from lombardy; evergreen wines are chianti and soave, while new wines from the centre and south of italy are quickly gaining recognition: verdicchio, sagrantino, primitivo, nero d'avola among others. the friuli-venezia giulia is world-famous for the quality of her white wines, like pinot grigio. special sweet wines like passitos and moscatos, made in different regions, are also famous since old time.
the regions are, roughly from northwest to southeast:

 italian regions
 vineyard in trentino-alto adige
aosta valley
piemonte
liguria
lombardia
trentino-alto adige/südtirol
friuli-venezia giulia
veneto
emilia-romagna
toscana
marche
umbria
lazio
sardinia
abruzzo
molise
campania
basilicata
puglia
calabria
sicily
italian grape varieties[edit]
italy's ministry of agriculture and forestry (mipaaf), has documented over 350 grapes and granted them "authorized" status. there are more than 500 other documented varieties in circulation, as well. the following is a list of the most common and important of italy's many grape varieties.

see also: list of italian grape varieties
bianco (white)[edit]
arneis: a variety from piedmont, which has been grown there since the 15th century.
catarratto: common in sicily and the most widely planted white variety in salaparuta.
fiano: grown on the southwest coast of italy.
friulano: a variety also known as sauvignon vert or sauvignonasse, it yields one of the most typical wines of friuli. the wine was previously known as tocai but the old name was prohibited by the european court of justice to avoid confusion with the tokay dessert wine from hungary.
garganega: the main grape variety for wines labeled soave, this is a dry white wine from the veneto wine region of italy. it is popular in northeast italy around the city of verona. currently, there are over 3,500 distinct producers of soave.
greco di tufo: grown on the southwest coast of italy.
malvasia bianca: a white variety that occurs throughout italy. it has many clones and mutations.
moscato blanc: grown mainly in piedmont, it is mainly used in the slightly-sparkling (frizzante), semi-sweet moscato d'asti. not to be confused with moscato giallo and moscato rosa, two germanic varietals that are grown in trentino alto-adige.
nuragus: an ancient sardinian variety found in southern sardegna, producing light and tart wines usually consumed as aperitifs.
passerina:  mainly derives from passerina grapes (it may even be produced purely with these), plus a minimum percentage of other white grapes and may be still, sparkling or passito. the still version has an acidic profile, which is typical of these grapes.
pecorino: native to marche and abruzzo, it is used in the falerio dei colli ascolani and offida doc wines. it is low-yielding, but will ripen early and at high altitudes. pecorino wines have a rich, aromatic character.
pigato: an acidic variety from liguria that is vinified to pair with seafood.
pinot grigio: a successful commercial grape (known as pinot gris in france), its wines are characterized by crispness and cleanness. the wine can range from mild to full-bodied.
ribolla gialla: a greek variety introduced by the venetians that now makes its home in friuli.
trebbiano: this is the most widely planted white varietal in italy. it is grown throughout the country, with a special focus on the wines from abruzzo and from lazio, including frascati. trebbiano from producers such as valentini have been known to age for 15+ years. it is known as ugni blanc in france.
verdicchio: this is grown in the areas of castelli di jesi and matelica in the marche region and gives its name to the varietal white wine made from it. the name comes from "verde" (green). in the last few years verdicchio wines are considered to be the best white wines of italy.[12]
vermentino: this is widely planted in sardinia and is also found in tuscan and ligurian coastal districts. the wines are a popular accompaniment to seafood.
other important whites include carricante, coda de volpe, cortese, falanghina, grechetto, grillo, inzolia, picolit, traminer, verduzzo, and vernaccia.
non-native varieties include chardonnay, gewürztraminer (sometimes called traminer aromatico), petite arvine, riesling, sauvignon blanc, and others.

rosso (red)[edit]
 sangiovese vineyards in the val d'orcia, monte amiata in the background.
aglianico del vulture: made from the aglianico grape in the vulture area of basilicata. this wine was recognized as doc in 1971.
aglianico: considered the "noble variety of the south",[citation needed] it is primarily grown in basilicata and campania. the name is probably derived from hellenic, so it is considered a greek transplant. the fruit is thick skinned and spicy fruit.
barbera: the most widely grown red wine grape of the piedmont and southern lombardy regions, the largest plantings of barbera are found near the towns of asti, alba, and pavia. barbera wines were once considered simply "what you drank while waiting for the barolo to be ready", but with a new generation of wine makers this is no longer the case. the wines are now meticulously vinified. in the asti region, barbera grapes are used in making "barbera d'asti superiore", which may be aged in french barriques to become nizza, a quality wine aimed at the international market. the vine has bright cherry-coloured fruit, and its wine is acidic with a dark colour.
corvina: along with the varieties rondinella and molinara, this is the principal grape which makes the famous wines of the veneto: valpolicella and amarone. valpolicella wine has dark cherry fruit and spice. after the grapes undergo passito (a drying process), the wine is now called amarone, and is high in alcohol (16% and up) and characterized by raisin, prune, and syrupy fruits. some amarones can age for 40+ years and command spectacular prices. in december 2009, there was celebration when the acclaimed amarone di valpolicella was finally awarded its long-sought docg status. the same method used for amarone is used for recioto, the oldest wine produced in this area, but the difference is that recioto is a sweet wine.[13]
dolcetto: a grape that grows alongside barbera and nebbiolo in piedmont, its name means "little sweet one", referring not to the taste of the wine, but the ease in which it grows and makes good wines suitable for everyday drinking. flavours of concord grape, wild blackberries, and herbs permeate the wine.
malvasia nera: red malvasia variety from piedmont. a sweet and perfumed wine, sometimes pronounced in the passito style.
montepulciano: not to be confused with the tuscan town of montepulciano, it is most widely planted grape on the opposite coast in abruzzo. its wines develop silky plum-like fruit notes, friendly acidity, and light tannins. more recently, producers have been creating a rich, inky, extracted version of this wine, a sharp contrast to the many inferior bottles produced in the past.[14]
nebbiolo: the most noble of italy's varieties. the name (meaning "little fog") refers to the autumn fog that blankets most of piedmont where nebbiolo is chiefly grown, and where it achieves the most successful results. a difficult grape variety to cultivate, it produces the most renowned barolo and barbaresco, made in the province of cuneo, along with the lesser-known ghemme and gattinara, made in the province of vercelli and sforzato, inferno and sassella made in valtellina. traditionally produced barolo can age for fifty years-plus, and is regarded by many wine enthusiasts as the greatest wine of italy.[15]
negroamaro: the name literally means "black bitter". a widely planted grape with its concentration in the region of puglia, it is the backbone of the salice salentino.
nero d'avola: this once-obscure native varietal wine of sicily is gaining attention for its dark fruit notes and strong tannins. the quality of nero d'avola has surged in recent years.[16]
primitivo: a red grape found in southern italy, most notably in apulia. primitivo ripens early and thrives in warm climates, where it can achieve very high alcohol levels. both primitivo and california zinfandel are clones of the croatian grape crljenak kaštelanski.
sagrantino: a native of umbria, it is planted on only 250 hectares, but the wines produced from it (either blended with sangiovese as rosso di montefalco or as a pure sagrantino) are world-renowned. these wines can age for many years.
sangiovese: italy's claim to fame and the pride of tuscany, this grape variety produces chianti (classico), rosso di montalcino, brunello di montalcino, rosso di montepulciano, and many others. sangiovese is also the backbone in many of the acclaimed, modern-styled "super-tuscans", where it is blended with three of the bordeaux varietals (cabernet sauvignon, merlot, and cabernet franc) and typically aged in french oak barrels, resulting in a wine primed for the international market in the style of a typical california cabernet: oaky, high-alcohol, and a ripe, fruit-forward profile.[17]
other major red varieties are cannonau, ciliegiolo, gaglioppo, lagrein, lambrusco, monica, nerello mascalese, pignolo, refosco, schiava, schioppettino, teroldego, and uva di troia.
"international" varieties such as cabernet franc, cabernet sauvignon, merlot, and syrah are also widely grown.

super tuscans[edit]
 vineyard in gaiole in chianti
the term "super tuscan"  (mostly used in the english-speaking world and less known in italy)[18] describes any wine (mostly red, but sometimes also white) produced in tuscany that generally does not adhere to the traditional local doc or docg regulations. as a result, super tuscans are usually toscana igt wines, while others are bolgheri doc, a designation of origin rather open to international grape varieties. traditional tuscan doc(g)s require that wines are made from native grapes and mostly sangiovese. while sometimes super tuscans are actually produced by sangiovese alone, they are also often obtained by (1) blending sangiovese with international grapes (such as cabernet sauvignon, merlot, cabernet franc, syrah), (2) blending international grapes alone (especially classic bordeaux grapes for reds; chardonnay and sauvignon blanc for whites), or (3) using one single international variety. in a sense, red super tuscans anticipated the meritage, a well-known category of international bordeaux-style reds of us origin.
although an extraordinary amount of wines claim to be “the first super tuscan,” most would agree that this credit belongs to sassicaia, the brainchild of marchese mario incisa della rocchetta, who planted cabernet sauvignon at his tenuta san guido estate in bolgheri back in 1944. it was for many years the marchese’s personal wine, until, starting with the 1968 vintage, it was released commercially in 1971.[19]
in 1968 azienda agricola san felice produced a super tuscan called vigorello, and in the 1970s piero antinori, whose family had been making wine for more than 600 years, also decided to make a richer wine by eliminating the white grapes from the chianti blend, and instead adding bordeaux varietals (namely, cabernet sauvignon and merlot).  he was inspired by sassicaia, of which he was given the sale agency by his uncle mario incisa della rocchetta. the result was one of the first super tuscans, which he named tignanello, after the vineyard where the grapes were grown. what was formerly chianti classico riserva vigneto tignanello, was pulled from the doc in 1971, first eliminating the white grapes (then compulsory in chianti doc) and gradually adding french varieties. by 1975, tignanello was made with 85% sangiovese, 10% cabernet sauvignon, and 5% cabernet franc, and it remains so today.[19] other winemakers started experimenting with super tuscan blends of their own shortly thereafter.
because these wines did not conform to strict doc(g) classifications, they were initially labeled as vino da tavola, meaning "table wine," an old official category ordinarily reserved for lower quality wines. the creation of the indicazione geografica tipica category (technically indicating a level of quality between vino da tavola and doc(g)) in 1992 and the doc bolgheri label in 1994 helped bring super tuscans "back into the fold" from a regulatory standpoint. since the pioneering work of the super tuscans, there has been a rapid expansion in production of high-quality wines throughout italy that do not qualify for doc or docg classification, as a result of the efforts of a new generation of italian wine producers and, in some cases, flying winemakers.

wine guides[edit]
many international wine guides and wine publications rate the most popular italian wines. among the italian publications, gambero rosso is probably the most influential. in particular, the wines that are annually given the highest rating of "three glasses" (tre bicchieri) attract much attention. recently, other guides, such as slow wine, published by slow food italia, and bibenda, compiled by the associazione italiana sommelier (ais), have also gained attention both among professionals and amateurs. slow wine has the interesting feature of reporting on several wineries (small and medium) that genuinely represent the territory and on products that are especially interesting for their price/quality ratio (vini slow and vini quotidiani).

vino cotto and vincotto[edit]
vino cotto (literally cooked wine) is a form of wine from the marche and abruzzo regions in central italy. it is typically made by individuals for their own use as it cannot legally be sold as wine. the must, from any of several local varieties of grapes, is heated in a copper vessel where it is reduced in volume by up to a third before fermenting in old wooden barrels. it can be aged for years, barrels being topped up with each harvest. it is a strong ruby-coloured wine, somewhat similar to madeira, usually drunk with sweet puddings.
vincotto, typically from apulia, also starts as a cooked must but is not fermented, resulting in a sweet syrup suitable for the preparation of sweets and soft drinks. once reduced and allowed to cool it is aged in storage for a few years.

see also[edit]


wine portal
italy portal
history of chianti
list of italian doc wines
list of italian docg wines
list of italian igt wines
old world wine
references[edit]


^ "wine - agriculture and rural development" (pdf). ec.europa.eu. retrieved 2 june 2016..mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/65/lock-green.svg/9px-lock-green.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d6/lock-gray-alt-2.svg/9px-lock-gray-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/aa/lock-red-alt-2.svg/9px-lock-red-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration{color:#555}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration span{border-bottom:1px dotted;cursor:help}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/wikisource-logo.svg/12px-wikisource-logo.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output code.cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:inherit;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#33aa33;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-right{padding-right:0.2em}

^ a b "wine". unrv.com. retrieved 2 june 2016.

^ the oxford companion to archaeology, brian murray fagan, 1996 oxford univ pr, p.757

^ wine: a scientific exploration, merton sandler, roger pinder, crc press, p.66

^ introduction to wine laboratory practices and procedures, jean l. jacobson, springer, p.84

^ "wine and rome". penelope.uchicago.edu. retrieved 2017-03-28.

^ mulligan, mary ewing and mccarthy, ed. italy: a passion for wine. indiana beverage journal, 2006.

^ "mipaaf - vini dop e igp". politicheagricole.it. retrieved 2017-03-28.

^ "mipaaf - disciplinari dei vini dop e igp italiani". politicheagricole.it. retrieved 2017-03-28.

^ a b c d k. o'keefe barolo and barbaresco: the king and queen of italian wine california university press 2014 isbn 9780520273269

^ speller, walter (26 march 2013). "kerin o'keefe's montalcino subzones". jancisrobinson.com.

^ novella talamo. "il verdicchio si conferma nel 2015 il vino bianco più premiato d'italia dalle guide e nomina sua ambasciatrice l'olimpionica della scherma elisa di francisca - luciano pignataro wineblog". lucianopignataro.it. retrieved 2017-03-28.

^ "archived copy". archived from the original on 2012-09-26. retrieved 2016-06-02.cs1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ "archived copy". archived from the original on 2009-10-01. retrieved 2016-06-02.cs1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ "the wine doctor". thewinedoctor.com. retrieved 2017-03-28. (subscription required)

^ "nero d'avola - best of sicily magazine". bestofsicily.com. retrieved 2017-03-28.

^ "california cabernet wine". streetdirectory.com. retrieved 2017-03-28.

^ peretti, angelo (2002). vini delle regioni d'italia [wines from the regions of italy] (in italian). novara: cartografia di novara. p. 145. isbn 88-509-0204-2.

^ a b o'keefe, kerin (2009). "rebels without a cause? the demise of super-tuscans" (pdf). the world of fine wine (23): 94–99.


further reading[edit]
 la sicilia del vino, di s. barresi, e. iachello, e. magnano di san lio, a. gabbrielli, s. foti, p. sessa. fotografia giò martorana, giuseppe maimone editore, catania 2003
kerin o'keefe, brunello di montalcino. understanding and appreciating one of italy's greatest wines, university of california press, 2012. isbn 9780520265646
kerin o'keefe, barolo and barbaresco. the king and queen of italian wine, university of california press, 2014. isbn 9780520273269
external links[edit]
italian wine appellations, from the italian ministry of agriculture (it)
national registry of grape varieties, from the italian ministry of agriculture (it)
vtewine by countryafrica
algeria
egypt
ethiopia
morocco
namibia
south africa
tanzania
tunisia
asia
armenia
azerbaijan
bhutan
china
georgia
india
iran
israel
japan
jordan
kazakhstan
lebanon
nepal
palestine
philippines
vietnam
europe
albania
austria
belgium
bulgaria
croatia
cyprus
czech republic
denmark
france
germany
greece
hungary
ireland
italy
latvia
liechtenstein
luxembourg
macedonia
malta
moldova
montenegro
netherlands
poland
portugal
romania
russia
san marino
serbia
slovakia
slovenia
spain
sweden
switzerland
turkey
ukraine
united kingdom
north america
canada
mexico
united states
oceania
australia
new zealand
south america
argentina
bolivia
brazil
chile
paraguay
peru
uruguay

vtewines and winemakinggeneral
acids in wine
aging of wine
annual growth cycle of grapevines
aroma of wine
alternative wine closure
cork
history
oak
oenology
screw cap
sommelier
terroir
vineyard
viticulture
wine and food matching
wine fault
wine personalities
wine tasting
wine tasting descriptors
styles and methods of production
aromatized
biodynamic
dessert
fortified
ice
kosher
noble rot
natural wine
orange
organic
red
rosé
sparkling
straw
table
white
grape varietiesinternationalwhite
chardonnay
chenin blanc
gewürztraminer
muscat
riesling
sauvignon blanc
sémillon
red
cabernet sauvignon
merlot
pinot noir
syrah / shiraz
regionalwhite
agh shani
albariño
aligoté
arneis
assyrtiko
chinuri
colombard
furmint
garganega
glera
grüner veltliner
kerner
khikhvi
krakhuna
krstač
malvasia
manata
marsanne
mtsvani
müller-thurgau
pinot blanc
pinot gris / pinot grigio
ribolla gialla
rkatsiteli
roussanne
shesh i bardhë
silvaner
smederevka
tamjanika
tetra
torrontés
ugni blanc / trebbiano
tsitska
tsolikouri
verdejo
verdelho
verdicchio
viognier
red
abbuoto
agiorgitiko
aglianico
aladasturi
aleksandrouli
alicante bouschet
asuretuli
băbească neagră
barbera
blaufränkisch
bobal
cabernet franc
caiño tinto
caladoc
calitor
çalkarası
camaraou
canaiolo
carignan
carménère
castelão
catanese
cesanese
césar
chatus
cienna
ciliegiolo
cinsaut
counoise
cornalin d'aoste
corvina
dolcetto
dzvelshava
enfariné noir
espadeiro
étraire
fer
fetească neagră
forcallat tinta
fortana
frappato
freisa
frühroter veltliner
fuella
gaglioppo
gamaret
gamay
garanoir
garró
gibrita
girò
gouget noir
graciano
grand noir de la calmette
grenache / garnacha
grignolino
grisa nera
grolleau
groppello
gros verdot
gueuche noir
helfensteiner
heroldrebe
hondarribi beltza
hron
izabella
jaén tinto
joubertin
juan garcía
kadarka
kalecik karası
kotsifali
krasnostop
kratosija
lacrima
lagrein
lambrusco
liatiko
limnio
listán negro
madrasa
magarach ruby
magliocco canino
magliocco dolce
mammolo
mandilaria
manseng
manto negro
malbec
maratheftiko
marselan
marzemino
mauzac noir
mavro
mavrodafni
mavrud
mencía / jaen
mission
montepulciano
mujuretuli
mourvèdre / monastrell / mataro
nebbiolo
negroamaro
nero d'avola
ojaleshi
petit verdot
petite sirah / durif
piedirosso
pinot meunier
pinotage
plavac mali
poulsard
prokupac
sagrantino
sangiovese
saperavi
shesh i zi
tannat
tavkveri
tempranillo
touriga nacional
trollinger
usakhelauri
vermentino
vranac
xinomavro
žametovka
zinfandel / primitivo
zweigelt

glossary
outline

vtecuisine of italyhistory
ancient roman cuisine
medieval cuisine
early modern cuisine
contemporary cuisine
regional cuisines
arbëreshë cuisine
lombard cuisine
neapolitan cuisine
roman cuisine
sicilian cuisine
venetian cuisine
pasta and sauces
pasta (list)
carbonara
pesto
ragù
neapolitan ragù
arrabbiata sauce
amatriciana sauce
marinara sauce
genovese sauce
bolognese sauce
checca sauce
pasta alla norma
pasta e fagioli
pasta al pomodoro
pasta primavera
rigatoni con la pajata
cacio e pepe
spaghetti aglio e olio
spaghetti alla puttanesca
spaghetti alle vongole
soups
soup alla canavese
soup alla modenese
soup all'imperatrice
acquacotta
bagnun
minestrone
ribollita
other dishes (list)
bagna càuda
braciola
bruschetta
cotoletta
crostino
bollito misto
baccalà alla vicentina
cacciatore
cacciucco
caponata
cappon magro
caprese salad
carciofi alla romana
carpaccio
carne pizzaiola
cassoeula
ciambotta
ciccioli
coda alla vaccinara
fiorentina
fondue
frico
frittata
frìttuli
istrian stew
lampredotto
polenta
porchetta
panzanella
parmigiana
ossobuco
orzotto
risotto
rollatini
saltimbocca
scaloppine
timballo
vitello tonnato
pizza and street food
pizza
al taglio
sicilian pizza
focaccia
piscialandrea
calzone
panzerotti
crocchè
arancini
supplì
frittula
panelle
pani câ meusa
panino
piadina
arrosticini
farinata
tramezzino
zippuli
sardenara
cheeses and charcuterie
cheeses
pdo
salumi
pastry and desserts (list)
bocconotto
bombolone
bruttiboni
buccellato
budino
cannoli
cantuccini
cassata
castagnaccio
cavallucci
colomba di pasqua
crostata
crocetta of caltanissetta
gelato
granita
grattachecca
marzipan
mustacciuoli
pandoro
panettone
panforte
panna cotta
panpepato
parrozzo
pastiera
pignolata
pizzelle
ricciarelli
seada
semifreddo
sfogliatelle
sorbetto
sponge cake
spumoni
struffoli
tartufo
tiramisu
torrone
torta caprese
zabaione
zeppole
zuccotto
zuppa inglese
breads
borlengo
breadstick
ciabatta
coppia ferrarese
filone
michetta
pane carasau
pane di altamura
pane sciocco
sgabeo
taralli
vastedda
wines
varieties
igt
docg
doc
abruzzo
calabrian
friulan
lombardy
piedmont
tuscan
veneto
alcoholic beverages
beer
grappa
sambuca
mirto
vermouth
spritz
limoncello
fernet
campari
aperol
cynar
amaro
amaretto
nocino
centerbe
bargnolino
maraschino
sassolino
strega
rosolio
galliano
frangelico
alchermes
aurum
coffee
caffè
espresso
lungo
ristretto
doppio
espressino
cappuccino
caffelatte
latte macchiato
caffè macchiato
caffè corretto
affogato
mocaccino
marocchino
bicerin
barbajada
bombardino
see also
sammarinese cuisine
italian-american cuisine
italian food products
osteria
trattoria
enoteca
sagra
list of italian chefs
list of italian dishes
meal structure

 italian cuisine portal
 italy portal
 food portal

vteitaly articleshistorychronology
prehistory
italic peoples
ancient peoples of italy
pre-nuragic sardinia
nuragic peoples
etruscan civilization
nuragic civilization
phoenician/carthaginian colonies
magna graecia
ancient rome
kingdom
republic
empire
middle ages
italy under odoacer
ostrogoths
byzantium
lombards
the holy roman empire
the sardinian judicates
arabs
normans
guelphs and ghibellines
the italian city-states
the maritime republics
renaissance
italian wars
early modern period
unification
revolutions of 1820
revolutions of 1830
revolutions of 1848
sicilian revolution of 1848
first war of independence
crimean war
second war of independence
expedition of the thousand
third war of independence
capture of rome
monarchy and the world wars
kingdom of italy
colonial empire
world war i
fascist italy
world war ii
resistance
civil war
republic
economic boom
years of lead
years of mud
mani pulite
by topic
citizenship
currency
economy
fashion
flags
genetic
historic states
military
music
postal
railways
geography
peninsula
northern
northwest
northeast
central
southern
south
insular
climate
fauna
flora
mountains
prealps
alps
apennines
volcanology
volcanoes
beaches
canals
caves
earthquakes
islands
lakes
national parks
rivers
valleys
politics
constitution
elections
referendums
foreign relations
missions
judiciary
law enforcement
military
parliament
chamber of deputies
senate
political parties
president
prime minister
council of ministers
regions
provinces
metropolitan cities
comune
municipalities
cities
economy
economic history
milan
naples
rome
turin
regions by gdp
automotive industry
banking
central bank
companies
energy
government debt
science and technology
stock exchange
taxation
telecommunications
internet
tourism
trade unions
transportation
welfare
society
abortion
adoption
billionaires
capital punishment
corruption
crime
demographics
education
secondary
higher
universities
emigration
fathers' rights movement
feminism
gambling
health
healthcare
immigration
lgbt rights
nobility
prostitution
racism
religion
smoking
social class
terrorism
women
culture
duecento
trecento
quattrocento
cinquecento
seicento
settecento
architecture
art
castles
cinema
cuisine
beer
wine
cultural icons
decorations
design
fashion
festivals
folklore
italian language
regional italian
italian literature
italophilia
italophobia
languages
media
newspapers
radio
tv
monuments
music
classical
folk
opera
popular
mythology
national symbols
anthem
emblem
flag
regions
national monument
personification
people
philosophy
public holidays
festa della repubblica
sculpture
sport
traditions
world heritage sites

 italy portal
 category
 commons
 news
quotes
travel
 wikiproject




 
						retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=italian_wine&oldid=882802972"					
categories: italian winehidden categories: cs1 maint: archived copy as titlepages containing links to subscription-only contentcs1 italian-language sources (it)all articles with unsourced statementsarticles with unsourced statements from august 2018 



navigation menu


personal tools

not logged intalkcontributionscreate accountlog in 



namespaces

articletalk 




variants







views

readeditview history 



more





search



 







navigation


main pagecontentsfeatured contentcurrent eventsrandom articledonate to wikipediawikipedia store 



interaction


helpabout wikipediacommunity portalrecent changescontact page 



tools


what links hererelated changesupload filespecial pagespermanent linkpage informationwikidata itemcite this page 



print/export


create a bookdownload as pdfprintable version 



in other projects


wikimedia commons 



languages


العربيةcatalàчӑвашлаdeutscheestiespañolfrançais한국어հայերենitalianolietuviųnederlands日本語norskpolskiportuguêsрусскийsimple englishsuomisvenskatürkçeукраїнськаtiếng việt中文 
edit links 





 this page was last edited on 11 february 2019, at 12:30 (utc).
text is available under the creative commons attribution-sharealike license;
additional terms may apply.  by using this site, you agree to the terms of use and privacy policy. wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the wikimedia foundation, inc., a non-profit organization.


privacy policy
about wikipedia
disclaimers
contact wikipedia
developers
cookie statement
mobile view



 

 



(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgpageparsereport":{"limitreport":{"cputime":"0.628","walltime":"0.846","ppvisitednodes":{"value":2683,"limit":1000000},"ppgeneratednodes":{"value":0,"limit":1500000},"postexpandincludesize":{"value":203383,"limit":2097152},"templateargumentsize":{"value":21907,"limit":2097152},"expansiondepth":{"value":13,"limit":40},"expensivefunctioncount":{"value":21,"limit":500},"unstrip-depth":{"value":1,"limit":20},"unstrip-size":{"value":49208,"limit":5000000},"entityaccesscount":{"value":0,"limit":400},"timingprofile":["100.00%  546.877      1 -total"," 45.66%  249.689      1 template:reflist"," 27.21%  148.780     11 template:navbox"," 24.40%  133.429     11 template:cite_web"," 15.93%   87.109      1 template:italy_topics"," 15.23%   83.287      1 template:country_topics"," 12.80%   70.001      1 template:cn"," 11.09%   60.623      1 template:fix","  9.79%   53.556      3 template:isbn","  5.99%   32.761      2 template:category_handler"]},"scribunto":{"limitreport-timeusage":{"value":"0.228","limit":"10.000"},"limitreport-memusage":{"value":5273216,"limit":52428800},"limitreport-logs":"table#1 {\n  [\"size\"] = \"tiny\",\n}\ntable#1 {\n  [\"size\"] = \"tiny\",\n}\ntable#1 {\n  [\"size\"] = \"tiny\",\n}\ntable#1 {\n  [\"size\"] = \"tiny\",\n}\n"},"cachereport":{"origin":"mw1278","timestamp":"20190211123034","ttl":2073600,"transientcontent":false}}});mw.config.set({"wgbackendresponsetime":120,"wghostname":"mw1270"});});


