



nuclear power plant - wikipedia
document.documentelement.classname = document.documentelement.classname.replace( /(^|\s)client-nojs(\s|$)/, "$1client-js$2" );
(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgcanonicalnamespace":"","wgcanonicalspecialpagename":false,"wgnamespacenumber":0,"wgpagename":"nuclear_power_plant","wgtitle":"nuclear power plant","wgcurrevisionid":883856236,"wgrevisionid":883856236,"wgarticleid":207347,"wgisarticle":true,"wgisredirect":false,"wgaction":"view","wgusername":null,"wgusergroups":["*"],"wgcategories":["wikipedia articles needing page number citations from november 2017","webarchive template wayback links","all articles with dead external links","articles with dead external links from december 2017","articles with permanently dead external links","pages containing links to subscription-only content","articles containing potentially dated statements from april 2014","all articles containing potentially dated statements","all articles with unsourced statements","articles with unsourced statements from june 2011","articles with unsourced statements from august 2014","articles with unsourced statements from september 2016","articles with unsourced statements from november 2017","articles to be expanded from november 2017","all articles to be expanded","articles using small message boxes","articles with unsourced statements from june 2013","articles with unsourced statements from march 2011","articles containing potentially dated statements from march 2007","wikipedia articles with gnd identifiers","wikipedia articles with nara identifiers","wikipedia articles with ndl identifiers","nuclear power stations","american inventions","soviet inventions","russian inventions"],"wgbreakframes":false,"wgpagecontentlanguage":"en","wgpagecontentmodel":"wikitext","wgseparatortransformtable":["",""],"wgdigittransformtable":["",""],"wgdefaultdateformat":"dmy","wgmonthnames":["","january","february","march","april","may","june","july","august","september","october","november","december"],"wgmonthnamesshort":["","jan","feb","mar","apr","may","jun","jul","aug","sep","oct","nov","dec"],"wgrelevantpagename":"nuclear_power_plant","wgrelevantarticleid":207347,"wgrequestid":"xgopvapaicgaalrbszoaaaca","wgcspnonce":false,"wgisprobablyeditable":true,"wgrelevantpageisprobablyeditable":true,"wgrestrictionedit":[],"wgrestrictionmove":[],"wgflaggedrevsparams":{"tags":{}},"wgstablerevisionid":null,"wgcategorytreepagecategoryoptions":"{\"mode\":0,\"hideprefix\":20,\"showcount\":true,\"namespaces\":false}","wgwikieditorenabledmodules":[],"wgbetafeaturesfeatures":[],"wgmediavieweronclick":true,"wgmediaviewerenabledbydefault":true,"wgpopupsshouldsendmoduletouser":true,"wgpopupsconflictswithnavpopupgadget":false,"wgvisualeditor":{"pagelanguagecode":"en","pagelanguagedir":"ltr","pagevariantfallbacks":"en","usepageimages":true,"usepagedescriptions":true},"wgmfispagecontentmodeleditable":true,"wgmfenablefontchanger":true,"wgmfdisplaywikibasedescriptions":{"search":true,"nearby":true,"watchlist":true,"tagline":false},"wgrelatedarticles":null,"wgrelatedarticlesusecirrussearch":true,"wgrelatedarticlesonlyusecirrussearch":false,"wgwmeschemaeditattemptstepoversample":false,"wgpoweredbyhhvm":true,"wgulscurrentautonym":"english","wgnoticeproject":"wikipedia","wgcentralnoticecookiestodelete":[],"wgcentralnoticecategoriesusinglegacy":["fundraising","fundraising"],"wgwikibaseitemid":"q134447","wgscorenotelanguages":{"arabic":"العربية","catalan":"català","deutsch":"deutsch","english":"english","espanol":"español","italiano":"italiano","nederlands":"nederlands","norsk":"norsk","portugues":"português","suomi":"suomi","svenska":"svenska","vlaams":"west-vlams"},"wgscoredefaultnotelanguage":"nederlands","wgcentralauthmobiledomain":false,"wgcodemirrorenabled":true,"wgvisualeditortoolbarscrolloffset":0,"wgvisualeditorunsupportededitparams":["undo","undoafter","veswitched"],"wgeditsubmitbuttonlabelpublish":true,"oreswikiid":"enwiki","oresbaseurl":"http://ores.discovery.wmnet:8081/","oresapiversion":3});mw.loader.state({"ext.gadget.charinsert-styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site.styles":"ready","site.styles":"ready","noscript":"ready","user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site":"ready","user":"ready","user.options":"ready","user.tokens":"loading","ext.cite.styles":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.shared":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.commonprint":"ready","mediawiki.toc.styles":"ready","wikibase.client.init":"ready","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.noscript":"ready","ext.uls.interlanguage":"ready","ext.wikimediabadges":"ready","ext.3d.styles":"ready","mediawiki.skinning.interface":"ready","skins.vector.styles":"ready"});mw.loader.implement("user.tokens@0tffind",function($,jquery,require,module){/*@nomin*/mw.user.tokens.set({"edittoken":"+\\","patroltoken":"+\\","watchtoken":"+\\","csrftoken":"+\\"});
});rlpagemodules=["ext.cite.ux-enhancements","site","mediawiki.page.startup","mediawiki.page.ready","mediawiki.toc","mediawiki.searchsuggest","ext.gadget.teahouse","ext.gadget.referencetooltips","ext.gadget.watchlist-notice","ext.gadget.drn-wizard","ext.gadget.charinsert","ext.gadget.reftoolbar","ext.gadget.extra-toolbar-buttons","ext.gadget.switcher","ext.centralauth.centralautologin","mmv.head","mmv.bootstrap.autostart","ext.popups","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.init","ext.visualeditor.targetloader","ext.eventlogging","ext.wikimediaevents","ext.navigationtiming","ext.uls.eventlogger","ext.uls.init","ext.uls.compactlinks","ext.uls.interface","ext.quicksurveys.init","ext.centralnotice.geoip","ext.centralnotice.startup","skins.vector.js"];mw.loader.load(rlpagemodules);});























 





nuclear power plant 
from wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 jump to navigation
jump to search
 a nuclear power station (grafenrheinfeld nuclear power plant, grafenrheinfeld, bavaria, germany). the nuclear reactor is contained inside the spherical containment building in the center – left and right are cooling towers which are common cooling devices used in all thermal power stations, and likewise, emit water vapor from the non-radioactive steam turbine section of the power plant.
 bohunice nuclear power plant in jaslovské bohunice in slovakia.
a nuclear power plant or nuclear power station is a thermal power station in which the heat source is a nuclear reactor. as it is typical of thermal power stations, heat is used to generate steam that drives a steam turbine connected to a generator that produces electricity. as of  23 april 2014[update], the iaea report there are 450 nuclear power reactors in operation[1] operating in 31 countries.[2]
nuclear plants  are usually considered to be base load stations since fuel is a small part of the cost of production[3] and because they cannot be easily or quickly dispatched. their operations and maintenance (o&m) and fuel costs are, along with hydropower stations, at the low end of the spectrum and make them suitable as base-load power suppliers.  the cost of spent fuel management, however, is somewhat uncertain.

contents

1 history
2 components
3 systems

3.1 nuclear reactor
3.2 steam turbine
3.3 generator
3.4 cooling system
3.5 safety valves
3.6 main condenser
3.7 feedwater pump
3.8 emergency power supply


4 workers in a nuclear power station
5 economics
6 safety and accidents
7 controversy
8 reprocessing
9 accident indemnification
10 decommissioning
11 historic accidents
12 flexibility of nuclear power stations
13 future power stations
14 see also
15 references
16 external links


history[edit]
 the control room at an american nuclear power station
main articles: nuclear reactor § early reactors, history of nuclear power, and nuclear fission § history
electricity was generated by a nuclear reactor for the first time ever on september 3, 1948 at the x-10 graphite reactor in oak ridge, tennessee in the united states, which was the first nuclear power station to power a light bulb.[4][5][6] the second, larger experiment occurred on december 20, 1951 at the ebr-i experimental station near arco, idaho in the united states. on june 27, 1954, the world's first nuclear power station to generate electricity for a power grid started operations at the soviet city of obninsk.[7] the world's first full scale power station, calder hall in england, opened on october 17, 1956.[8] the world's first full scale power station solely devoted to electricity production (calder hall was also meant to produce plutonium), shippingport power plant in the united states, connected to the grid on december 18, 1957.

components[edit]
the key components common to current nuclear power plants are:

reactor assembly
nuclear fuel
nuclear reactor core
neutron moderator
startup neutron source
neutron poison
neutron howitzer (provides steady source of neutrons to re-initiate reaction following shutdown)
coolant (often the neutron moderator and the coolant are the same, usually both purified water)
control rods
reactor pressure vessel (rpv)
steam generation
boiler feedwater pump
steam generators (not in bwrs)
power generation
steam turbine
electrical generator
condenser
cooling tower (not always required)
fuel handling
radwaste system (a section of the plant handling radioactive waste)
refueling floor
spent fuel pool
safety systems
reactor protective system (rps)
emergency diesel generators
emergency core cooling systems (eccs)
standby liquid control system (emergency boron injection, in bwrs only)
essential service water system (esws)
containment building
controls
control room
emergency operations facility
nuclear training facility (usually contains a control room simulator)
systems[edit]
 bwr schematic
 pressurized water reactor
 primary coolant system showing reactor pressure vessel (red), steam generators (purple), pressurizer (blue), and pumps (green) in the three coolant loop hualong one pressurized water reactor design
the conversion to electrical energy takes place indirectly, as in conventional thermal power stations. the fission in a nuclear reactor heats the reactor coolant. the coolant may be water or gas or even liquid metal depending on the type of reactor. the reactor coolant then goes to a steam generator and heats water to produce steam.  the pressurized steam is then usually fed to a multi-stage steam turbine. after the steam turbine has expanded and partially condensed the steam, the remaining vapor is condensed in a condenser. the condenser is a heat exchanger which is connected to a secondary side such as a river or a cooling tower. the water is then pumped back into the steam generator and the cycle begins again. the water-steam cycle corresponds to the rankine cycle.

nuclear reactor[edit]
main article: nuclear reactor
the nuclear reactor is the heart of the station. in its central part, the reactor's core produces heat due to nuclear fission. with this heat, a coolant is heated as it is pumped through the reactor and thereby removes the energy from the reactor. heat from nuclear fission is used to raise steam, which runs through turbines, which in turn powers the electrical generators.
nuclear reactors usually rely on uranium to fuel the chain reaction.  uranium is a very heavy metal that is abundant on earth and is found in sea water as well as most rocks.  naturally occurring uranium is found in two different isotopes: uranium-238 (u-238), accounting for 99.3% and uranium-235 (u-235) accounting for about 0.7%.  isotopes are atoms of the same element with a different number of neutrons.  thus, u-238 has 146 neutrons and u-235 has 143 neutrons.  different isotopes have different behaviours.  for instance, u-235 is fissile which means that it is easily split and gives off a lot of energy making it ideal for nuclear energy.  on the other hand, u-238 does not have that property despite it being the same element.  different isotopes also have different half-lives.  a half-life is the amount of time it takes for half of a sample of a radioactive element to decay.  u-238 has a longer half-life than u-235, so it takes longer to decay over time.  this also means that u-238 is less radioactive than u-235.
since nuclear fission creates radioactivity, the reactor core is surrounded by a protective shield. this containment absorbs radiation and prevents radioactive material from being released into the environment. in addition, many reactors are equipped with a dome of concrete to protect the reactor against both internal casualties and external impacts.[9]

steam turbine[edit]
main article: steam turbine
the purpose of the steam turbine is to convert the heat contained in steam into mechanical energy. the engine house with the steam turbine is usually structurally separated from the main reactor building. it is so aligned to prevent debris from the destruction of a turbine in operation from flying towards the reactor.[citation needed]
in the case of a pressurized water reactor, the steam turbine is separated from the nuclear system. to detect a leak in the steam generator and thus the passage of radioactive water at an early stage, an activity meter is mounted to track the outlet steam of the steam generator. in contrast, boiling water reactors pass radioactive water through the steam turbine, so the turbine is kept as part of the radiologically controlled area of the nuclear power station.

generator[edit]
main article: electric generator
the generator converts mechanical power supplied by the turbine into electrical power. low-pole ac synchronous generators of high rated power are used.

cooling system[edit]
a cooling system removes heat from the reactor core and transports it to another area of the station, where the thermal energy can be harnessed to produce electricity or to do other useful work. typically the hot coolant is used as a heat source for a boiler, and the pressurized steam from that drives one or more steam turbine driven electrical generators.[10]

safety valves[edit]
in the event of an emergency, safety valves can be used to prevent pipes from bursting or the reactor from exploding. the valves are designed so that they can derive all of the supplied flow rates with little increase in pressure. in the case of the bwr, the steam is directed into the suppression chamber and condenses there. the chambers on a heat exchanger are connected to the intermediate cooling circuit.

main condenser[edit]
the main condenser is a large cross-flow tube-and-shell heat exchanger that takes wet vapor, a mixture of liquid water and steam at saturation conditions, from the turbine-generator exhaust and condenses it back into sub-cooled liquid water so it can be pumped back to the reactor by the condensate and feedwater pumps.[11] 
in the main condenser the wet vapor turbine exhaust come into contact with thousands of tubes that have much colder water flowing through them on the other side.
the cooling water typically come from a natural body of water such as a river or lake. 
palo verde nuclear generating station, located in the desert about 60 miles west of phoenix, arizona, is the only nuclear facility that does not use a natural body of water for cooling, instead it uses treated sewage from the greater phoenix metropolitan area. 
the water coming from the cooling body of water is either pumped back to the water source at a warmer temperature or returns to a cooling tower where it either cools for more uses or evaporates into water vapor that rises out the top of the tower. [12]

feedwater pump[edit]
the water level in the steam generator and the nuclear reactor is controlled using the feedwater system. the feedwater pump has the task of taking the water from the condensate system, increasing the pressure and forcing it into either the steam generators (in the case of a pressurized water reactor) or directly into the reactor (for boiling water reactors).

emergency power supply[edit]
continuous power supply to the reactor is critical to ensure safe operation.
most nuclear stations require at least two distinct sources of offsite power for redundancy.
these are usually provided by multiple transformers that are sufficiently separated and can receive power from multiple transmission lines. 
in addition, in some nuclear stations, the turbine generator can power the station's loads while the station is online, without requiring external power.
this is achieved via station service transformers which tap power from the generator output before they reach the step-up transformer. 
this is in addition to station service transformers that receive offsite power directly from the switch yard. 
even with the redundancy of two power sources, total loss of offsite power is still possible. for this reason, nuclear power stations are also equipped with emergency generators.

workers in a nuclear power station[edit]
nuclear engineers
reactor operators
health physicists
emergency response team personnel
nuclear regulatory commission resident inspectors
in the united states and canada, workers except for management, professional (such as engineers) and security personnel are likely to be members of either the international brotherhood of electrical workers (ibew) or the utility workers union of america (uwua), or one of the various trades and labor unions representing machinist, laborers, boilermakers, millwrights, ironworkers etc.[citation needed]

economics[edit]
main article: economics of new nuclear power plants
 the bruce nuclear generating station, the largest nuclear power facility in the world[13]
the economics of new nuclear power stations is a controversial subject, and multibillion-dollar investments ride on the choice of an energy source. nuclear power stations typically have high capital costs, but low direct fuel costs, with the costs of fuel extraction, processing, use and spent fuel storage internalized costs. therefore, comparison with other power generation methods is strongly dependent on assumptions about construction timescales and capital financing for nuclear stations. cost estimates take into account station decommissioning and nuclear waste storage or recycling costs in the united states due to the price anderson act. with the prospect that all spent nuclear fuel/"nuclear waste" could potentially be recycled by using future reactors, generation iv reactors are being designed to completely close the nuclear fuel cycle. however, up to now, there has not been any actual bulk recycling of waste from a npp, and on-site temporary storage is still being used at almost all plant sites due to waste repository construction problems.  only finland has stable repository plans, therefore from a worldwide perspective, long-term waste storage costs are uncertain.

 some nuclear reactors in operation release clouds of non-radioactive water vapor to get rid of waste heat. pictured: doel nuclear power station
on the other hand, construction, or capital cost aside, measures to mitigate global warming such as a carbon tax or carbon emissions trading, increasingly favor the economics of nuclear power. further efficiencies are hoped to be achieved through more advanced reactor designs, generation iii reactors promise to be at least 17% more fuel efficient, and have lower capital costs, while futuristic generation iv reactors promise 10000-30000% greater fuel efficiency and the elimination of nuclear waste.
in eastern europe, a number of long-established projects are struggling to find finance, notably belene in bulgaria and the additional reactors at cernavoda in romania, and some potential backers have pulled out.[14] where cheap gas is available and its future supply relatively secure, this also poses a major problem for nuclear projects.[14]
analysis of the economics of nuclear power must take into account who bears the risks of future uncertainties. to date all operating nuclear power stations were developed by state-owned or regulated utility monopolies[15] where many of the risks associated with construction costs, operating performance, fuel price, and other factors were borne by consumers rather than suppliers. many countries have now liberalized the electricity market where these risks and the risk of cheaper competitors emerging before capital costs are recovered, are borne by station suppliers and operators rather than consumers, which leads to a significantly different evaluation of the economics of new nuclear power stations.[16]
following the 2011 fukushima i nuclear accidents, costs are likely to go up for currently operating and new nuclear power stations, due to increased requirements for on-site spent fuel management and elevated design basis threats.[17] however many designs, such as the currently under construction ap1000, use passive nuclear safety cooling systems, unlike those of fukushima i which required active cooling systems, which largely eliminates the need to spend more on redundant back up safety equipment.

safety and accidents[edit]
main articles: nuclear safety and security and § nuclear power plant safety and security
in his book, normal accidents, charles perrow says that multiple and unexpected failures are built into society's complex and tightly-coupled nuclear reactor systems. such accidents are unavoidable and cannot be designed around.[18] an interdisciplinary team from mit has estimated that given the expected growth of nuclear power from 2005 – 2055, at least four serious nuclear accidents would be expected in that period.[19][20] however the mit study does not take into account improvements in safety since 1970.[21][22] to date, there have been five serious accidents (core damage) in the world since 1970 (one at three mile island in 1979; one at chernobyl in 1986; and three at fukushima-daiichi in 2011), corresponding to the beginning of the operation of generation ii reactors. this leads to on average one serious accident happening every eight years worldwide.[citation needed]
modern nuclear reactor designs have had numerous safety improvements since the first-generation nuclear reactors. a nuclear power plant cannot explode like a nuclear weapon because the fuel for uranium reactors is not enriched enough, and nuclear weapons require precision explosives to force fuel into a small enough volume to go supercritical. most reactors require continuous temperature control to prevent a core meltdown, which has occurred on a few occasions through accident or natural disaster, releasing radiation and making the surrounding area uninhabitable. plants must be defended against theft of nuclear material (for example to make a dirty bomb) and attack by enemy military (which has occurred)[23] planes or missiles, or planes hijacked by terrorists.

controversy[edit]
main article: nuclear power debate
 the abandoned city of prypiat, ukraine, following the chernobyl disaster. the chernobyl nuclear power station is in the background.
the nuclear power debate is about the controversy[24][25][26][27] which has surrounded the deployment and use of nuclear fission reactors to generate electricity from nuclear fuel for civilian purposes. the debate about nuclear power peaked during the 1970s and 1980s, when it "reached an intensity unprecedented in the history of technology controversies", in some countries.[28][29]
proponents argue that nuclear power is a sustainable energy source which reduces carbon emissions and can increase energy security if its use supplants a dependence on imported fuels.[30] proponents advance the notion that nuclear power produces virtually no air pollution, in contrast to the chief viable alternative of fossil fuel. proponents also believe that nuclear power is the only viable course to achieve energy independence for most western countries. they emphasize that the risks of storing waste are small and can be further reduced by using the latest technology in newer reactors, and the operational safety record in the western world is excellent when compared to the other major kinds of power plants.[31]
opponents say that nuclear power poses many threats to people and the environment, and that costs do not justify benefits. threats include health risks and environmental damage from uranium mining, processing and transport, the risk of nuclear weapons proliferation or sabotage, and the unsolved problem of radioactive nuclear waste.[32][33][34] another environmental issue is discharge of hot water into the sea. the hot water modifies the environmental conditions for marine flora and fauna. they also contend that reactors themselves are enormously complex machines where many things can and do go wrong, and there have been many serious nuclear accidents.[35][36] critics do not believe that these risks can be reduced through new technology.[37] they argue that when all the energy-intensive stages of the nuclear fuel chain are considered, from uranium mining to nuclear decommissioning, nuclear power is not a low-carbon electricity source.[38][39][40] those countries that do not contain uranium mines cannot achieve energy independence through existing nuclear power technologies. actual construction costs often exceed estimates, and spent fuel management costs do not have a clear time limit.[citation needed]

reprocessing[edit]
main article: nuclear reprocessing
nuclear reprocessing technology was developed to chemically separate and recover fissionable plutonium from irradiated nuclear fuel.[41] reprocessing serves multiple purposes, whose relative importance has changed over time. originally reprocessing was used solely to extract plutonium for producing nuclear weapons. with the commercialization of nuclear power, the reprocessed plutonium was recycled back into mox nuclear fuel for thermal reactors.[42] the reprocessed uranium, which constitutes the bulk of the spent fuel material, can in principle also be re-used as fuel, but that is only economic when uranium prices are high or disposal is expensive. finally, the breeder reactor can employ not only the recycled plutonium and uranium in spent fuel, but all the actinides, closing the nuclear fuel cycle and potentially multiplying the energy extracted from natural uranium by more than 60 times.[43]
nuclear reprocessing reduces the volume of high-level waste, but by itself does not reduce radioactivity or heat generation and therefore does not eliminate the need for a geological waste repository. reprocessing has been politically controversial because of the potential to contribute to nuclear proliferation, the potential vulnerability to nuclear terrorism, the political challenges of repository siting (a problem that applies equally to direct disposal of spent fuel), and because of its high cost compared to the once-through fuel cycle.[44] in the united states, the obama administration stepped back from president bush's plans for commercial-scale reprocessing and reverted to a program focused on reprocessing-related scientific research.[45]

accident indemnification[edit]
the vienna convention on civil liability for nuclear damage puts in place an international framework for nuclear liability.[46]
however states with a majority of the world's nuclear power stations, including the u.s., russia, china and japan, are not party to international nuclear liability conventions.
in the u.s., insurance for nuclear or radiological incidents is covered (for facilities licensed through 2025) by the price-anderson nuclear industries indemnity act.
under the energy policy of the united kingdom through its nuclear installations act 1965, liability is governed for nuclear damage for which a uk nuclear licensee is responsible. the act requires compensation to be paid for damage up to a limit of £150 million by the liable operator for ten years after the incident. between ten and thirty years afterwards, the government meets this obligation. the government is also liable for additional limited cross-border liability (about £300 million) under international conventions (paris convention on third party liability in the field of nuclear energy and brussels convention supplementary to the paris convention).[47]

decommissioning[edit]
main article: nuclear decommissioning
nuclear decommissioning is the dismantling of a nuclear power station and decontamination of the site to a state no longer requiring protection from radiation for the general public. the main difference from the dismantling of other power stations is the presence of radioactive material that requires special precautions to remove and safely relocate to a waste repository.
generally speaking, nuclear stations were originally designed for a life of about 30 years.[48][49] newer stations are designed for a 40 to 60-year operating life.[50]  the centurion reactor is a future class of nuclear reactor that is being designed to last 100 years.[51] one of the major limiting wear factors is the deterioration of the reactor's pressure vessel under the action of neutron bombardment,[49] however in 2018 rosatom announced it had developed a thermal annealing technique for reactor pressure vessels which ameliorates radiation damage and extends service life by between 15 and 30 years.[52]
decommissioning involves many administrative and technical actions. it includes all clean-up of radioactivity and progressive demolition of the station. once a facility is decommissioned, there should no longer be any danger of a radioactive accident or to any persons visiting it. after a facility has been completely decommissioned it is released from regulatory control, and the licensee of the station no longer has responsibility for its nuclear safety.

historic accidents[edit]
main article: nuclear power accidents by country
this section needs expansion. you can help by adding to it. (november 2017)
 the 2011 fukushima daiichi nuclear disaster in japan, the worst nuclear accident in 25 years, displaced 50,000 households after radiation leaked into the air, soil and sea.[53] radiation checks led to bans of some shipments of vegetables and fish.[54]
the chernobyl disaster occurred in april 1986, it is considered the worst nuclear accident in history. 
an experiment was being carried out on one of the reactors in the plant. the purpose of the experiment was to find out the reactor's safety in the event of the failure of the main electricity supply to the plant. right after the experiment began there was a steam explosion which exposed the reactor's graphite moderator to air, which caused it to ignite. the resulting fire sent highly radioactive plumes of smoke into the atmosphere for about ten days. 
the radioactive plume spread over large areas of europe. 
approximately 350,000 people were evacuated from the 3200 kilometers squared exclusion zone. 
the accident caused 31 direct deaths from the explosion and radiation poisoning, and several more deaths in the population exposed to high radiation doses.[55]
the nuclear industry says that new technology and oversight have made nuclear station much safer, but 57 small accidents have occurred since the chernobyl disaster in 1986 until 2008. two thirds of these mishaps occurred in the us.[19] the french atomic energy agency (cea) has concluded that technical innovation cannot eliminate the risk of human errors in nuclear station operation.[citation needed]
according to benjamin sovacool, an interdisciplinary team from mit in 2003 estimated that given the expected growth of nuclear power from 2005 – 2055, at least four serious nuclear accidents would be expected in that period.[19] however the mit study does not take into account improvements in safety since 1970.[21][22]

flexibility of nuclear power stations[edit]
nuclear stations are used primarily for base load because of economic considerations. the fuel cost of operations for a nuclear station is smaller than the fuel cost for operation of coal or gas plants. 
since most of the cost of nuclear power plant is capital cost, there is almost no cost saving by running it at less than full capacity.
nuclear power plants are routinely used in load following mode on a large scale in france, although "it is generally accepted that this is not an ideal economic situation for nuclear stations."[56] 
unit a at the german biblis nuclear power plant is designed to in- and decrease its output 15% per minute between 40 and 100% of its nominal power.[57]
boiling water reactors normally have load-following capability, implemented by varying the recirculation water flow.[citation needed]

future power stations[edit]
a new generation of designs for nuclear power stations, known as the generation iv reactors, are the subject of active research. many of these new designs specifically attempt to make fission reactors cleaner, safer and/or less of a risk to the proliferation of nuclear weapons. passively safe stations (such as the esbwr) are available to be built[58] and other reactors that are designed to be nearly fool-proof are being pursued.[59] fusion reactors, which are still in the early stages of development, diminish or eliminate some of the risks associated with nuclear fission.[60]
two 1600 mwe european pressurized reactors (eprs) are being built in europe, and two are being built in china. the reactors are a joint effort of french areva and german siemens ag, and will be the largest reactors in the world. one epr is in olkiluoto, finland, as part of the olkiluoto nuclear power plant. the reactor was originally scheduled to go online in 2009, but has been repeatedly delayed,[61][62] and as of september 2014 has been pushed back to 2018.[63] preparatory work for the  epr at the flamanville nuclear power plant in flamanville, manche, france was started in 2006, with a scheduled completion date of 2012.[64] the french reactor has also been delayed, and was projected, in 2013, to launch in 2016.[65][66] the two chinese eprs are part of the taishan nuclear power plant in taishan, guangdong. the taishan reactors were scheduled to go online in 2014 and 2015,[67] but that has been delayed to 2017.[68]
as of  march 2007[update], there are seven nuclear power stations under construction in india, and five in china.[69]
in november 2011 gulf power stated that by the end of 2012 it hopes to finish buying off 4000 acres of land north of pensacola, florida in order to build a possible nuclear power station.[70]
in 2010 russia launched a floating nuclear power station. the £100 million vessel, the akademik lomonosov, is the first of seven stations that will bring vital energy resources to remote russian regions.[71]
by 2025, southeast asia nations plan to have a total of 29 nuclear power stations: indonesia will have 4 nuclear power stations, malaysia 4, thailand 5 and vietnam 16 from nothing at all in 2011.[72]
in 2013 china had 32[73] nuclear reactors under construction, the highest number in the world.
expansion at two nuclear power stations in the united states, vogtle and v. c. summer nuclear power station, located in georgia and south carolina, respectively, were scheduled to be completed between 2016 and 2019.  the construction of the two south carolina reactors have been abandoned due to cost overruns and the bankruptcy of westinghouse electric company (who designed and was building the reactors) in march 2017[74]. the two new vogtle reactors, and the two new reactors at virgil c. summer nuclear station, represented the first nuclear power construction projects in the united states since the three mile island nuclear accident in 1979.
the uk government has given the go-ahead for the hinkley point c nuclear power station.[75]
several countries have begun thorium-based nuclear power programs. thorium is four times more abundant in the earth's crust than uranium. over 60% of thorium's ore monazite is found in five countries: australia, the united states, india, brazil, and norway. these thorium resources are enough to power current energy needs for thousands of years.[76]  the thorium fuel cycle is able to generate nuclear energy with a lower output of radiotoxic waste than the uranium fuel cycle.[77]

see also[edit]


energy portal
nuclear technology portal

list of nuclear reactors
list of nuclear power stations (> 1,000 mw net capacity)
auxiliary feedwater
gerald w. brown, american whistleblower on passive fire protection/circuit integrity deficiencies in us and canadian plants
containment building
fossil-fuel power station
nuclear fuel cycle
nuclear information and resource service
nuclear power by country
nuclear regulatory commission of the usa
safety engineering
scram
u.s. federal emergency management agency (fema)
uranium market

references[edit]


^ "pris - home". iaea.org. retrieved 2015-11-01..mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/65/lock-green.svg/9px-lock-green.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d6/lock-gray-alt-2.svg/9px-lock-gray-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/aa/lock-red-alt-2.svg/9px-lock-red-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration{color:#555}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration span{border-bottom:1px dotted;cursor:help}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/wikisource-logo.svg/12px-wikisource-logo.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output code.cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:inherit;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#33aa33;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-right{padding-right:0.2em}

^ "world nuclear power reactors 2007-08 and uranium requirements". world nuclear association. 2008-06-09. archived from the original on march 3, 2008. retrieved 2008-06-21.

^ "nuclear power economics - nuclear energy costs - world nuclear association". www.world-nuclear.org.

^ "graphite reactor". 31 october 2013. archived from the original on 2 november 2013.

^ "graphite reactor photo gallery". 31 october 2013. archived from the original on 2013-11-02. retrieved 2013-11-01.

^ "first atomic power plant at x-10 graphite reactor". 31 october 2013.

^ "russia's nuclear fuel cycle". world-nuclear.org. retrieved 1 november 2015.

^ "queen switches on nuclear power". bbc online. 17 october 2008. retrieved 1 april 2012.

^ william, kaspar et al. (2013). a review of the effects of radiation on microstructure and properties of concretes used in nuclear power plants. washington, d.c.: nuclear regulatory commission, office of nuclear regulatory research.

^ "how nuclear power works". howstuffworks.com. retrieved september 25, 2008.

^ "nuclear regulatory commission library - main condenser".

^ "cooling power plants | power plant water use for cooling - world nuclear association". www.world-nuclear.org. retrieved 2017-09-27.

^ "the largest nuclear generating facility in the world". archived from the original on 2013-01-02.

^ a b kidd, steve (january 21, 2011). "new reactors—more or less?". nuclear engineering international. archived from the original on december 12, 2011.

^ ed crooks (12 september 2010). "nuclear: new dawn now seems limited to the east". financial times. retrieved 12 september 2010.

^ the future of nuclear power. massachusetts institute of technology. 2003. isbn 978-0-615-12420-9. retrieved 2006-11-10.

^ massachusetts institute of technology (2011). "the future of the nuclear fuel cycle" (pdf). p. xv.

^ daniel e whitney (2003). "normal accidents by charles perrow" (pdf). massachusetts institute of technology.

^ a b c benjamin k. sovacool (january 2011). "second thoughts about nuclear power" (pdf). national university of singapore. p. 8. archived from the original (pdf) on 2013-01-16.

^ massachusetts institute of technology (2003). "the future of nuclear power" (pdf). p. 48.

^ a b vermont legislative research shop: nuclear power uvm.edu, accessed 26 december 2018

^ a b massachusetts institute of technology (2003). "the future of nuclear power" (pdf). p. 49.

^ "legal experts: stuxnet attack on iran was illegal 'act of force'". wired. 25 march 2013.

^ mackenzie, james j (1977). "the nuclear power controversy. arthur w. murphy". the quarterly review of biology. 52 (4): 467–8. doi:10.1086/410301. jstor 2823429.

^ walker, j. samuel (10 january 2006). three mile island: a nuclear crisis in historical perspective. university of california press. pp. 10–11. isbn 978-0-520-24683-6.

^ in february 2010 the nuclear power debate played out on the pages of the new york times, see a reasonable bet on nuclear power and revisiting nuclear power: a debate and a comeback for nuclear power?

^ in july 2010 the nuclear power debate again played out on the pages of the new york times, see we’re not ready
nuclear energy: the safety issues

^ kitschelt, herbert p (2009). "political opportunity structures and political protest: anti-nuclear movements in four democracies". british journal of political science. 16 (1): 57–85. doi:10.1017/s000712340000380x. jstor 193981.

^ jim falk (1982). global fission: the battle over nuclear power, oxford university press.[page needed]

^ u.s. energy legislation may be `renaissance' for nuclear power.

^ bernard cohen. "the nuclear energy option". retrieved 2009-12-09.

^ "nuclear energy is not a new clear resource". theworldreporter.com. 2010-09-02.

^ greenpeace international and european renewable energy council (january 2007). energy revolution: a sustainable world energy outlook archived 2009-08-06 at the wayback machine, p. 7.

^ giugni, marco (2004). social protest and policy change: ecology, antinuclear, and peace movements in comparative perspective. rowman & littlefield. pp. 44–. isbn 978-0-7425-1827-8.

^ stephanie cooke (2009). in mortal hands: a cautionary history of the nuclear age, black inc., p. 280.

^ sovacool, benjamin k (2008). "the costs of failure: a preliminary assessment of major energy accidents, 1907–2007". energy policy. 36 (5): 1802–20. doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2008.01.040.

^ jim green . nuclear weapons and 'fourth generation' reactors chain reaction, august 2009, pp. 18-21.

^ kleiner, kurt (2008). "nuclear energy: assessing the emissions". nature reports climate change. 2 (810): 130–1. doi:10.1038/climate.2008.99.

^ mark diesendorf (2007). greenhouse solutions with sustainable energy, university of new south wales press, p. 252.

^ diesendorf, mark (2007). "is nuclear energy a possible solution to global warming" (pdf). social alternatives. 26 (2). archived from the original (pdf) on 2012-07-22.

^ andrews, a. (2008, march 27). nuclear fuel reprocessing: u.s. policy. crs report for congress. retrieved march 25, 2011, from www.fas.org/sgp/crs/nuke/rs22542

^ mox fuel can extend the energy extracted by about 12% and slightly reduces plutonium stocks. information from the world nuclear association about mox[permanent dead link]

^ "supply of uranium". world nuclear association. retrieved 2010-01-29.

^ harold feiveson;  et al. (2011). "managing nuclear spent fuel: policy lessons from a 10-country study". bulletin of the atomic scientists.

^ "adieu to nuclear recycling". nature. 460 (7252): 152. 9 july 2009. bibcode:2009natur.460r.152.. doi:10.1038/460152b. pmid 19587715.

^ "publications: international conventions and legal agreements". iaea.org. retrieved 1 november 2015.

^ "nuclear section of the uk department of trade & industry's website". archived from the original on 2006-02-15.

^ "nuclear decommissioning: decommission nuclear facilities". world-nuclear.org. retrieved 2013-09-06.

^ a b "совершенно секретно". sovsekretno.ru. retrieved 1 november 2015.

^ "table 2.  quote: designed operational life time (year) 60" (pdf). uxc.com. p. 489.

^ sherrell r. greene, "centurion reactors – achieving commercial power reactors with 100+ year operating lifetimes'", oak ridge national laboratory, published in transactions of winter 2009 american nuclear society national meeting, november 2009, washington, d.c.

^ "rosatom launches annealing technology for vver-1000 units". world nuclear news. 27 november 2018. retrieved 28 november 2018.

^ tomoko yamazaki and shunichi ozasa (june 27, 2011). "fukushima retiree leads anti-nuclear shareholders at tepco annual meeting". bloomberg.

^ mari saito (may 7, 2011). "japan anti-nuclear protesters rally after pm call to close plant". reuters.

^ beresford, n.a; fesenko, s; konoplev, a; skuterud, l; smith, j.t; voigt, g (2016). "thirty years after the chernobyl accident: what lessons have we learnt?". journal of environmental radioactivity. 157: 77–89. doi:10.1016/j.jenvrad.2016.02.003. pmid 27018344.

^ steve kidd. nuclear in france - what did they get right? archived 2010-05-11 at the wayback machine nuclear engineering international, june 22, 2009.

^ robert gerwin: kernkraft heute und morgen: kernforschung und kerntechnik als chance unserer zeit. (english nuclear power today and tomorrow: nuclear research as chance of our time) in: bild d. wissenschaft. deutsche verlags-anstalt, 1971. isbn 3-421-02262-3.

^ "next-generation nuclear technology: the esbwr" (pdf). american nuclear society. retrieved september 25, 2008.

^ elmer-dewitt, philip (1991-04-29). "how to build a safer reactor". time.com. retrieved september 25, 2008.(subscription required)

^ "fusion energy: the agony, the ecstasy and alternatives". physicsworld.com. november 7, 1997. retrieved october 27, 2014.(subscription required)

^ finland nuclear reactor delayed again, business week, 4 december 2006

^ areva to take 500 mln eur charge for finnish reactor delay, forbes, 5 december 2006

^ "olkiluoto 3 startup pushed back to 2018". world nuclear news. 1 september 2014. retrieved 28 october 2014.

^ "construction of flamanville epr begins". world nuclear news. 4 december 2007. archived from the original on 2014-10-14. retrieved 28 october 2014.

^ "flamanville epr vessel delivered". world nuclear news. 7 october 2013. retrieved 28 october 2014.

^ patel, tara; bakewell, sally (22 october 2013). "u.k. nuclear future relies on reactor plagued by delays: energy". bloomberg.com. retrieved 28 october 2014.

^ "taishan generator stator lift". world nuclear news. 11 october 2013. retrieved 28 october 2014.

^ "edf hopes french epr will launch before chinese reactors". reuters. 31 july 2014. retrieved 28 october 2014.

^ harris, emily (may 24, 2007). "progress on finnish nuclear reactor lags". npr news. retrieved october 27, 2014.

^ "possible north escambia gulf power nuclear plant faces fight". northescambia.com. retrieved 1 november 2015.

^ halpi, tony (april 17, 2007). "floating nuclear power stations raise spectre of chernobyl at sea". the times. archived from the original on july 6, 2008.

^ "indonesia planning to have four nuke power plants by 2025". retrieved october 23, 2011.

^ "pris - country details". iaea.org. archived from the original on 2015-11-18. retrieved 2013-09-24.

^ mccarty, dawn; alpeyev, pavel. "toshiba projects record loss as nuclear unit files for bankruptcy". bloomberg. retrieved 29 september 2017.

^ moylan, john (15 september 2016). "what is hinkley point and why is it important?"  – via www.bbc.co.uk.

^ juhasz, albert j.; rarick, richard a.; rangarajan, rajmohan. "high efficiency nuclear power plants using liquid fluoride thorium reactor technology" (pdf). nasa. retrieved 27 october 2014.

^ sokolov, f.; fukuda, k.; nawada, h.p. "thorium fuel cycle — potential benefits and challenges" (pdf). international atomic energy agency. retrieved 27 october 2014.


external links[edit]



wikimedia commons has media related to nuclear power plant.
non destructive testing for nuclear power plants
information about all npp in the world
civil liability for nuclear damage - world nuclear association
glossary of nuclear terms
critical hour: three mile island, the nuclear legacy, and national security online book by albert j. fritsch, arthur h. purcell, and mary byrd davis (2005).
vtenuclear power by countrygwe > 10
canada
china
france
japan
russia
south korea
ukraine
united states
gwe > 2
belgium
czech republic
finland
germany
india
taiwan
spain
sweden
switzerland
united kingdom
gwe > 1
argentina
brazil
bulgaria
hungary
mexico
romania
slovakia
south africa
pakistan
gwe < 1
armenia
iran
netherlands
slovenia
planned
albania
algeria
bangladesh
belarus
chile
indonesia
jordan
kazakhstan
kenya
morocco
myanmar
nigeria
north korea
poland
saudi arabia
sri lanka
thailand
tunisia
turkey
uae
abandoning  plans for  new plants
australia
austria
azerbaijan
cuba
georgia
ghana
ireland
kuwait
libya
lithuania
oman
peru
portugal
singapore
syria
taiwan
venezuela
vietnam
phasing-out
austria [already]
belgium
germany
italy [already]
south korea [gradually]
spain
switzerland
taiwan
other opposed
australia
denmark
greece
ireland
israel
latvia
liechtenstein
luxembourg
malaysia
malta
new zealand
norway
philippines

list of nuclear power stations
nuclear energy policy
nuclear energy policy by country
nuclear accidents
nuclear technology portal

vtenuclear technologyscience
chemistry
engineering
physics
atomic nucleus
fission
fusion
radiation
ionizing
braking
fuel
tritium
deuterium
helium-3
fertile material
fissile material
isotope separation
nuclear material
uranium
enriched
depleted
plutonium
thorium
neutron
activation
capture
poison
cross section
generator
radiation
reflector
temperature
thermal
fast
fusion
power
by country
power plant
economics
multi-mission radioisotope thermoelectric generator
accidents and incidents
policy
fusion
radioisotope thermoelectric (rtg)
propulsion
rocket
safety and security
medicineimaging
radball
scintigraphy
single-photon emission (spect)
positron-emission tomography (pet)
therapy
fast-neutron
neutron capture therapy of cancer
targeted alpha-particle
proton-beam
tomotherapy
brachytherapy
radiation therapy
radiosurgery
radiopharmacology
weaponstopics
arms race
delivery
design
disarmament
ethics
explosion
effects
history
proliferation
testing
high-altitude
underground
warfare
yield
tnte
lists
estimated death tolls from attacks
states with nuclear weapons
tests
united states
wmd treaties
weapon-free zones
weapons
wasteproducts
actinide
reprocessed uranium
reactor-grade plutonium
minor actinide
activation
fission
llfp
actinide chemistry
disposal
fuel cycle
high-level (hlw)
low-level (llw)
repository
reprocessing
spent fuel
pool
cask
transmutation
debate
nuclear power
nuclear weapons
blue ribbon commission on america's nuclear future
anti-nuclear movement
uranium mining
nuclear power phase-out
nuclear reactorsfissionmoderatorlight water
aqueous homogeneous
boiling
bwr
abwr
esbwr
kerena
pressurized
ap1000
apr-1400
apr+
apwr
atmea1
cap1400
cpr-1000
epr
hpr-1000
acpr1000
acp1000
vver
many others
supercritical (scwr)
natural fission
heavy waterd2o
pressurized
candu
candu 6
candu 9
ec6
afcr
acr-1000
ahwr
cvtr
iphwr-x
phwr kwu
mzfr
r3
r4 marviken
h2o
hwlwr
atr
hw blwr 250
steam-generating (sghwr)
organic
wr-1
co2
hwgcr
el-4
ks 150
kkn
graphite .mw-parser-output .nobold{font-weight:normal}by coolantwaterh2o
am-1
amb-x
egp-6
rbmk
gasco2
uranium naturel graphite gaz (ungg)
magnox
advanced gas-cooled (agr)
he
gtmhr
mhr-t
uhtrex
vhtr (htgr)
pbr (pbmr)
avr
htr-10
htr-pm
thtr-300
pmr
molten-saltfluorides
fuji msr
liquid-fluoride thorium reactor (lftr)
molten-salt reactor experiment (msre)
integral molten salt reactor (imsr)
thorcon
none(fast-neutron)
breeder (fbr)
integral (ifr)
liquid-metal-cooled (lmfr)
small sealed transportable autonomous (sstar)
traveling-wave (twr)
energy multiplier module (em2)
reduced-moderation (rmwr)
fast breeder test reactor (fbtr)
dual fluid reactor (dfr)
generation iv
sodium (sfr)
bn-350
bn-600
bn-800
bn-1200
cfr-600
phénix
superphénix
pfbr
cefr
pfr
prism
lead (lfr)
helium gas (gfr)
others
organically moderated and cooled reactor
arbus
piqua
aircraft reactor experiment

fusionby confinementmagnetic
field-reversed configuration
levitated dipole
reversed field pinch
spheromak
stellarator
tokamak
inertial
bubble (acoustic)
fusor
electrostatic
laser-driven
magnetized-target
z-pinch
other
dense plasma focus
migma
muon-catalyzed
polywell
pyroelectric

 category
portal
 commons

vteelectricity deliveryconcepts
availability factor
automatic generation control
backfeeding
base load
capacity factor
demand factor
droop speed control
economic dispatch
electric power
demand management
eroei
fault
home energy storage
grid storage
intermittency
load factor
load following
nameplate capacity
peak demand
power quality
power-flow study
repowering
utility frequency
variability
sourcesnonrenewable
coal
fossil fuel power station
natural gas
petroleum
nuclear
oil shale
renewable
biomass
biofuel
geothermal
hydro
marine
current
osmotic
thermal
tidal
wave
solar
wind
generation
ac power
cogeneration
combined cycle
cooling tower
induction generator
micro chp
microgeneration
rankine cycle
three-phase electric power
virtual power plant
transmissionand distribution
demand response
distributed generation
dynamic demand
electric power distribution
electrical busbar system
electric power system
electric power transmission
electrical grid
electrical interconnector
high-voltage direct current
high-voltage shore connection
load management
mains electricity by country
power line
power station
power storage
pumped hydro
smart grid
substation
super grid
transformer
transmission system operator (tso)
transmission tower
utility pole
failure modes
blackout (rolling blackout)
brownout
black start
cascading failure
protectivedevices
arc-fault circuit interrupter
earth leakage circuit breaker
residual-current device (gfi)
power-system protection
protective relay
digital protective relay
sulfur hexafluoride circuit breaker
economicsand policies
carbon offset
cost of electricity by source
ecotax
energy subsidies
feed-in tariff
fossil-fuel phase-out
net metering
pigovian tax
renewable energy certificates
renewable energy payments
renewable energy policy
spark/dark/quark/bark spread
statistics and production
list of electricity sectors
electric energy consumption

categories
electric power distribution
electricity economics
power station technology
portals
energy
renewable energy
sustainable development

vtenatural resourcesairpollution / quality
ambient standards (usa)
index
indoor
developing nations
law
clean air act (usa)
ozone depletion
emissions
airshed
trading
deforestation (redd)
energy
law
resources
fossil fuels (peak oil)
geothermal
hydro
tidal
wave
nuclear
solar
sunlight
shade
wind
land
arable
peak farmland
degradation
law
property
management
habitat conservation
minerals
mining
law
sand
peak
rights
soil
conservation
fertility
health
resilience
use
planning
reserve
life
biodiversity
bioprospecting
biosphere
bushfood
bushmeat
fisheries
law
management
food
forests
genetic resources
law
management
game
law
gene bank
herbalist plants
marine conservation
non-timber forest products
rangeland
seed bank
wildlife
conservation
management
wood
watertypes / location
aquifer
storage and recovery
drinking
fresh
groundwater
pollution
recharge
remediation
hydrosphere
ice
bergs
glacial
polar
irrigation
huerta
rain
harvesting
stormwater
surface water
wastewater
reclaimed
aspects
desalination
floods
law
leaching
sanitation
conflict
conservation
peak water
pollution
privatization
quality
right
resources
management
policy
related
commons
enclosure
global
land
tragedy of
economics
ecological
land
ecosystem services
exploitation
overexploitation
earth overshoot day
management
adaptive
natural capital
accounting
nature reserve
systems ecology
urban ecology
wilderness
resource
common-pool
conflict (perpetuation)
curse
depletion
extraction
nationalism
renewable / non-renewable

 portal
 category

authority control 
gnd: 4030329-9
nara: 10642232
ndl: 00959930




 
						retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=nuclear_power_plant&oldid=883856236"					
categories: nuclear power stationsamerican inventionssoviet inventionsrussian inventionshidden categories: wikipedia articles needing page number citations from november 2017webarchive template wayback linksall articles with dead external linksarticles with dead external links from december 2017articles with permanently dead external linkspages containing links to subscription-only contentarticles containing potentially dated statements from april 2014all articles containing potentially dated statementsall articles with unsourced statementsarticles with unsourced statements from june 2011articles with unsourced statements from august 2014articles with unsourced statements from september 2016articles with unsourced statements from november 2017articles to be expanded from november 2017all articles to be expandedarticles using small message boxesarticles with unsourced statements from june 2013articles with unsourced statements from march 2011articles containing potentially dated statements from march 2007wikipedia articles with gnd identifierswikipedia articles with nara identifierswikipedia articles with ndl identifiers 



navigation menu


personal tools

not logged intalkcontributionscreate accountlog in 



namespaces

articletalk 




variants







views

readeditview history 



more





search



 







navigation


main pagecontentsfeatured contentcurrent eventsrandom articledonate to wikipediawikipedia store 



interaction


helpabout wikipediacommunity portalrecent changescontact page 



tools


what links hererelated changesupload filespecial pagespermanent linkpage informationwikidata itemcite this page 



print/export


create a bookdownload as pdfprintable version 



in other projects


wikimedia commons 



languages


alemannischالعربيةasturianuazərbaycancaবাংলাbân-lâm-gúбеларускаябеларуская (тарашкевіца)‎българскиboarischbosanskibrezhonegcatalàčeštinacymraegdanskdeutscheestiespañolesperantoeuskaraفارسیfrançaisfryskgalego한국어հայերենहिन्दीhrvatskibahasa indonesiaíslenskaitalianoעבריתქართულიқазақшаkurdîlatinalatviešulietuviųlimburgsmagyarbahasa melayuмонголnederlands日本語norsknorsk nynorskoccitanoʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀpolskiportuguêsromânăрусскийсаха тылаscotsseeltersksicilianusimple englishslovenščinaکوردیсрпски / srpskisrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиsuomisvenskaதமிழ்ไทยtürkçeукраїнськаاردوtiếng việtwinaray粵語zeêuws中文 
edit links 





 this page was last edited on 18 february 2019, at 01:49 (utc).
text is available under the creative commons attribution-sharealike license;
additional terms may apply.  by using this site, you agree to the terms of use and privacy policy. wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the wikimedia foundation, inc., a non-profit organization.


privacy policy
about wikipedia
disclaimers
contact wikipedia
developers
cookie statement
mobile view



 

 



(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgpageparsereport":{"limitreport":{"cputime":"1.096","walltime":"1.315","ppvisitednodes":{"value":5569,"limit":1000000},"ppgeneratednodes":{"value":0,"limit":1500000},"postexpandincludesize":{"value":351782,"limit":2097152},"templateargumentsize":{"value":6874,"limit":2097152},"expansiondepth":{"value":20,"limit":40},"expensivefunctioncount":{"value":19,"limit":500},"unstrip-depth":{"value":1,"limit":20},"unstrip-size":{"value":189786,"limit":5000000},"entityaccesscount":{"value":4,"limit":400},"timingprofile":["100.00% 1006.811      1 -total"," 53.68%  540.461      1 template:reflist"," 21.00%  211.419     34 template:cite_web"," 11.57%  116.516      8 template:fix"," 10.33%  104.023     19 template:navbox"," 10.26%  103.316      5 template:citation_needed","  7.79%   78.453      7 template:cite_journal","  7.63%   76.825      1 template:nuclear_technology","  7.29%   73.405      1 template:navbox_with_collapsible_groups","  6.68%   67.219     16 template:cite_news"]},"scribunto":{"limitreport-timeusage":{"value":"0.517","limit":"10.000"},"limitreport-memusage":{"value":7828096,"limit":52428800}},"cachereport":{"origin":"mw1341","timestamp":"20190218015001","ttl":2073600,"transientcontent":false}}});mw.config.set({"wgbackendresponsetime":113,"wghostname":"mw1319"});});


