



nuclear arms race - wikipedia
document.documentelement.classname = document.documentelement.classname.replace( /(^|\s)client-nojs(\s|$)/, "$1client-js$2" );
(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgcanonicalnamespace":"","wgcanonicalspecialpagename":false,"wgnamespacenumber":0,"wgpagename":"nuclear_arms_race","wgtitle":"nuclear arms race","wgcurrevisionid":881346654,"wgrevisionid":881346654,"wgarticleid":585704,"wgisarticle":true,"wgisredirect":false,"wgaction":"view","wgusername":null,"wgusergroups":["*"],"wgcategories":["webarchive template wayback links","cs1 maint: multiple names: authors list","all articles with unsourced statements","articles with unsourced statements from august 2014","wikipedia articles needing clarification from december 2017","articles with unsourced statements from september 2015","articles with unsourced statements from october 2007","articles needing more viewpoints from december 2016","articles with unsourced statements from december 2016","articles with unsourced statements from october 2009","weapons of the cold war","nuclear weapons","nuclear weapons of the united states","nuclear weapons program of the soviet union","geopolitical rivalry","soviet union–united states relations","india–pakistan relations","foreign relations of the soviet union","technological races"],"wgbreakframes":false,"wgpagecontentlanguage":"en","wgpagecontentmodel":"wikitext","wgseparatortransformtable":["",""],"wgdigittransformtable":["",""],"wgdefaultdateformat":"dmy","wgmonthnames":["","january","february","march","april","may","june","july","august","september","october","november","december"],"wgmonthnamesshort":["","jan","feb","mar","apr","may","jun","jul","aug","sep","oct","nov","dec"],"wgrelevantpagename":"nuclear_arms_race","wgrelevantarticleid":585704,"wgrequestid":"xgx-2gpamfsaahsr3biaaabu","wgcspnonce":false,"wgisprobablyeditable":true,"wgrelevantpageisprobablyeditable":true,"wgrestrictionedit":[],"wgrestrictionmove":[],"wgflaggedrevsparams":{"tags":{}},"wgstablerevisionid":null,"wgcategorytreepagecategoryoptions":"{\"mode\":0,\"hideprefix\":20,\"showcount\":true,\"namespaces\":false}","wgwikieditorenabledmodules":[],"wgbetafeaturesfeatures":[],"wgmediavieweronclick":true,"wgmediaviewerenabledbydefault":true,"wgpopupsshouldsendmoduletouser":true,"wgpopupsconflictswithnavpopupgadget":false,"wgvisualeditor":{"pagelanguagecode":"en","pagelanguagedir":"ltr","pagevariantfallbacks":"en","usepageimages":true,"usepagedescriptions":true},"wgmfispagecontentmodeleditable":true,"wgmfenablefontchanger":true,"wgmfdisplaywikibasedescriptions":{"search":true,"nearby":true,"watchlist":true,"tagline":false},"wgrelatedarticles":null,"wgrelatedarticlesusecirrussearch":true,"wgrelatedarticlesonlyusecirrussearch":false,"wgwmeschemaeditattemptstepoversample":false,"wgpoweredbyhhvm":true,"wgulscurrentautonym":"english","wgnoticeproject":"wikipedia","wgcentralnoticecookiestodelete":[],"wgcentralnoticecategoriesusinglegacy":["fundraising","fundraising"],"wgwikibaseitemid":"q550452","wgscorenotelanguages":{"arabic":"العربية","catalan":"català","deutsch":"deutsch","english":"english","espanol":"español","italiano":"italiano","nederlands":"nederlands","norsk":"norsk","portugues":"português","suomi":"suomi","svenska":"svenska","vlaams":"west-vlams"},"wgscoredefaultnotelanguage":"nederlands","wgcentralauthmobiledomain":false,"wgcodemirrorenabled":true,"wgvisualeditortoolbarscrolloffset":0,"wgvisualeditorunsupportededitparams":["undo","undoafter","veswitched"],"wgeditsubmitbuttonlabelpublish":true,"oreswikiid":"enwiki","oresbaseurl":"http://ores.discovery.wmnet:8081/","oresapiversion":3});mw.loader.state({"ext.gadget.charinsert-styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site.styles":"ready","site.styles":"ready","noscript":"ready","user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site":"ready","user":"ready","user.options":"ready","user.tokens":"loading","ext.cite.styles":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.shared":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.commonprint":"ready","mediawiki.toc.styles":"ready","wikibase.client.init":"ready","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.noscript":"ready","ext.uls.interlanguage":"ready","ext.wikimediabadges":"ready","ext.3d.styles":"ready","mediawiki.skinning.interface":"ready","skins.vector.styles":"ready"});mw.loader.implement("user.tokens@0tffind",function($,jquery,require,module){/*@nomin*/mw.user.tokens.set({"edittoken":"+\\","patroltoken":"+\\","watchtoken":"+\\","csrftoken":"+\\"});
});rlpagemodules=["ext.cite.ux-enhancements","site","mediawiki.page.startup","mediawiki.page.ready","mediawiki.toc","mediawiki.searchsuggest","ext.gadget.teahouse","ext.gadget.referencetooltips","ext.gadget.watchlist-notice","ext.gadget.drn-wizard","ext.gadget.charinsert","ext.gadget.reftoolbar","ext.gadget.extra-toolbar-buttons","ext.gadget.switcher","ext.centralauth.centralautologin","mmv.head","mmv.bootstrap.autostart","ext.popups","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.init","ext.visualeditor.targetloader","ext.eventlogging","ext.wikimediaevents","ext.navigationtiming","ext.uls.eventlogger","ext.uls.init","ext.uls.compactlinks","ext.uls.interface","ext.quicksurveys.init","ext.centralnotice.geoip","ext.centralnotice.startup","skins.vector.js"];mw.loader.load(rlpagemodules);});























 





nuclear arms race 
from wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 jump to navigation
jump to search
 united states and soviet union/russia nuclear weapon stockpiles
nuclear weapons
background
history
warfare
design
testing
delivery
yield
effects and estimated megadeaths of explosions
winter
workers
ethics
arsenals
arms race
espionage
proliferation
disarmament
terrorism
opposition

nuclear-armed states
npt recognizedunited states
russia
united kingdom
france
china
othersindia
israel (undeclared)
pakistan
north korea
formersouth africa
belarus 
kazakhstan
ukraine
vte
the nuclear arms race was an arms race competition for supremacy in nuclear warfare between the united states, the soviet union, and their respective allies during the cold war. during this period, in addition to the american and soviet nuclear stockpiles, other countries developed nuclear weapons, though none engaged in warhead production on nearly the same scale as the two superpowers.

contents

1 world war ii
2 early cold war

2.1 warhead development
2.2 arms race
2.3 delivery vehicles
2.4 mutual assured destruction (mad)


3 initial nuclear proliferation
4 cuban missile crisis
5 détente

5.1 treaties


6 reagan and the strategic defense initiative
7 the end of the cold war
8 post–cold war
9 india and pakistan
10 defense against nuclear attacks
11 see also
12 references
13 further reading
14 external links


world war ii[edit]
the first nuclear weapon was created by the united states of america. during the second world war and was developed to be used against the axis powers.[1] scientists of the soviet union were aware of the potential of nuclear weapons and had also been conducting research on the field.[2]
the soviet union was not informed officially of the manhattan project until stalin was briefed at the potsdam conference on july 24, 1945, by u.s. president harry s. truman,[3][4]  eight days after the first successful test of a nuclear weapon.  despite their wartime military alliance, the united states and britain had not trusted the soviets enough to keep knowledge of the manhattan project safe from german spies: there were also concerns that, as an ally, the soviet union would request and expect to receive technical details of the new weapon.[citation needed]
when president truman informed stalin of the weapons, he was surprised at how calmly stalin reacted to the news and thought that stalin had not understood what he had been told. other members of the united states and british delegations who closely observed the exchange formed the same conclusion.[5]
in fact stalin had long been aware of the program,[6] despite the manhattan project having a secret classification so high that, even as vice president, truman did not know about it or the development of the weapons (truman was not informed until shortly after he became president).[6] a ring of spies operating within the manhattan project, (including klaus fuchs[7] and theodore hall) had kept stalin well informed of american progress.[8] they provided the soviets with detailed designs of the implosion bomb and the hydrogen bomb.[citation needed] fuchs' arrest in 1950 led to the arrests of many other russian spies, including harry gold, david greenglass, and ethel and julius rosenberg.[9]
in august 1945, on truman's orders, two atomic bombs were dropped on japanese cities.  the first bomb was dropped on hiroshima, and the second bomb was dropped on nagasaki by the b-29 bombers named enola gay and bockscar respectively.
shortly after the end of the second world war in 1945, the united nations was founded. during the united nation's first general assembly in london in january 1946, they discussed the future of nuclear weapons and created the united nations atomic energy commission. the goal of this assembly was to eliminate the use of all nuclear weapons. the united states presented their solution, which was called the baruch plan.[10] this plan proposed that there should be an international authority that controls all dangerous atomic activities. the soviet union disagreed with this proposal and rejected it. the soviets' proposal involved universal nuclear disarmament. both the american and soviet proposals were refused by the un.

early cold war[edit]
main articles: massive retaliation, cold war (1947–53), and cold war (1953–62)
warhead development[edit]
in the years immediately after the second world war, the united states had a monopoly on specific knowledge of and raw materials for nuclear weaponry. american leaders hoped that their exclusive ownership of nuclear weapons would be enough to draw concessions from the soviet union but this proved ineffective.
just six months after the un general assembly, the united states conducted its first post-war nuclear tests. this was called operation crossroads.[11] the purpose of this operation was to test the effectiveness of nuclear explosions on ships. these tests were performed at bikini atoll in the pacific on 95  ships, including german and japanese ships that were captured during world war ii. one plutonium implosion-type bomb was detonated over the fleet, while the other one was detonated underwater.
behind the scenes, the soviet government was working on building its own atomic weapons. during the war, soviet efforts had been limited by a lack of uranium but new supplies in eastern europe were found and provided a steady supply while the soviets developed a domestic source. while american experts had predicted that the soviet union would not have nuclear weapons until the mid-1950s, the first soviet bomb was detonated on august 29, 1949, shocking the entire world. the bomb, named "first lightning" by the west, was more or less a copy of "fat man", one of the bombs the united states had dropped on japan in 1945.
both governments spent massive amounts to increase the quality and quantity of their nuclear arsenals. both nations quickly began the development of a hydrogen bomb and the united states detonated the first hydrogen bomb on november 1, 1952, on enewetak, an atoll in the pacific ocean.[12] code-named "ivy mike", the project was led by edward teller, a hungarian-american nuclear physicist. it created a cloud 100 miles wide and 25 miles high, killing all life on the surrounding islands.[13]  again, the soviets surprised the world by exploding a deployable thermonuclear device in august 1953 although it was not a true multi-stage hydrogen bomb. however, it was small enough to be dropped from an airplane, making it ready for use. the development of these two soviet bombs was greatly aided by the russian spies harry gold and klaus fuchs.
on march 1, 1954, the u.s. conducted the castle bravo test, which tested another hydrogen bomb on bikini atoll.[14]  scientists significantly underestimated the size of the bomb, thinking it would yield 5 megatons. however, it yielded 14.8 megatons, which is the largest nuclear explosion tested by the u.s.  the explosion was so large the nuclear fallout exposed residents up to 300 miles away to significant amounts of radiation. they were eventually evacuated, but most of them experienced radiation poisoning and resulted in one death from a crew member of a fishing boat 90 miles from the explosion.
the soviet union detonated its first "true" hydrogen bomb on november 22, 1955, which had a yield of 1.6 megatons. on october 30, 1961, the soviets detonated a hydrogen bomb with a yield of approximately 58 megatons.[15]

arms race[edit]
with both sides in the "cold war" having nuclear capability, an arms race developed, with the soviet union attempting first to catch up and then to surpass the americans.[16]

delivery vehicles[edit]
strategic bombers were the primary delivery method at the beginning of the cold war.
missiles had long been regarded the ideal platform for nuclear weapons, and were potentially a more effective delivery system than bombers. starting in the 1950s, medium-range ballistic missiles and intermediate-range ballistic missiles ("irbm"s) were developed for delivery of tactical nuclear weapons, and the technology developed to the progressively longer ranges, eventually becoming intercontinental ballistic missiles (icbms).  on october 4, 1957, the soviet union showed the world that they had missiles able to reach any part of the world when they launched the sputnik satellite into earth orbit. the united states launched its first satellite explorer 1 on january 31, 1958.
meanwhile, submarine-launched ballistic missiles were also developed.  by the 1960s, the "triad" of nuclear weapon delivery was established, with each side deploying bombers, icbms, and slbms, in order to insure that even if a defense was found against one delivery method, the other methods would still be available.
some in the united states during the early 1960s pointed out that although all of the individual components of nuclear missiles had been tested separately (warheads, navigation systems, rockets), it was infeasible to test them all combined. critics charged that it was not really known how a warhead would react to the gravity forces and temperature differences encountered in the upper atmosphere and outer space, and kennedy was unwilling to run a test of an icbm with a live warhead. the closest thing to an actual test was 1962's operation frigate bird, in which the submarine uss ethan allen (ssbn-608) launched a polaris a2 missile over 1,000 miles to the nuclear test site at christmas island. it was challenged by, among others, curtis lemay, who put missile accuracy into doubt to encourage the development of new bombers. other critics pointed out that it was a single test which could be an anomaly; that it was a lower-altitude slbm and therefore was subject to different conditions than an icbm; and that significant modifications had been made to its warhead before testing.


intercontinental ballistic missiles (icbms), warheads and throw-weights of united states and soviet union, 1964–1982[17][18]


year

launchers

warheads

megatonnage


united states

soviet union

united states

soviet union

united states

soviet union


1964

2,416

375

6,800

500

7,500

1,000


1966

2,396

435

5,000

550

5,600

1,200


1968

2,360

1,045

4,500

850

5,100

2,300


1970

2,230

1,680

3,900

1,800

4,300

3,100


1972

2,230

2,090

5,800

2,100

4,100

4,000


1974

2,180

2,380

8,400

2,400

3,800

4,200


1976

2,100

2,390

9,400

3,200

3,700

4,500


1978

2,058

2,350

9,800

5,200

3,800

5,400


1980

2,042

2,490

10,000

7,200

4,000

6,200


1982

2,032

2,490

11,000

10,000

4,100

8,200

mutual assured destruction (mad)[edit]
main article: mutual assured destruction
by the 1950s both the united states and the soviet union had enough nuclear power to obliterate[clarification needed] the other side. both sides developed a capability to launch a devastating attack even after sustaining a full assault from the other side (especially by means of submarines), called a second strike.[19] this policy became known as mutual assured destruction: both sides knew that any attack upon the other would be devastating to themselves, thus in theory restraining them from attacking the other.
both soviet and american experts hoped to use nuclear weapons for extracting concessions from the other, or from other powers such as china, but the risk connected with using these weapons was so grave that they refrained from what john foster dulles referred to as brinkmanship. while some, like general douglas macarthur, argued nuclear weapons should be used during the korean war, both truman and eisenhower opposed the idea.[citation needed]
both sides were unaware of the details of the capacity of the enemy's arsenal of nuclear weapons. the americans suffered from a lack of confidence, and in the 1950s they believed in a non-existing bomber gap. aerial photography later revealed that the soviets had been playing a sort of potemkin village game with their bombers in their military parades, flying them in large circles, making it appear they had far more than they truly did. the 1960 american presidential election saw accusations of a wholly spurious missile gap between the soviets and the americans. on the other side, the soviet government exaggerated the power of soviet weapons to the leadership and nikita khrushchev.[citation needed]

initial nuclear proliferation[edit]
main article: nuclear proliferation
in addition to the united states and the soviet union, three other nations, the united kingdom,[20] people's republic of china,[21] and france[22] developed nuclear weapons during the early cold war years.
in 1952, the united kingdom became the third nation to possess nuclear weapons when it detonated an atomic bomb in operation hurricane[23] on october 3, 1952, which had a yield of 25 kilotons. despite major contributions to the manhattan project by both canadian and british governments, the u.s. congress passed the atomic energy act of 1946, which prohibited multi-national cooperation on nuclear projects. the mcmahon act fueled resentment from british scientists and winston churchill, as they believed that there were agreements regarding post-war sharing of nuclear technology, and led to britain developing its own nuclear weapons. britain did not begin planning the development of their own nuclear weapon until january 1947. because of britain’s small size, they decided to test their bomb on the monte bello islands, off the coast of australia. following this successful test, under the leadership of churchill, britain decided to develop and test a hydrogen bomb.  the first successful hydrogen bomb test occurred on november 8, 1957, which had a yield of 1.8 megatons.[24]  an amendment to the atomic energy act in 1958 allowed nuclear cooperation once again, and british-u.s. nuclear programs resumed. during the cold war, british nuclear deterrence came from submarines and nuclear-armed aircraft. the resolution class ballistic missile submarines armed with the american-built polaris missile provided the sea deterrent, while aircraft such as the avro vulcan, sepecat jaguar, panavia tornado and several other royal air force strike aircraft carrying we.177 gravity bomb provided the air deterrent.
france became the fourth nation to possess nuclear weapons on february 13, 1960, when the atomic bomb "gerboise bleue" was detonated in algeria,[25] then still a french colony [formally a part of the metropolitan france.] france began making plans for a nuclear-weapons program shortly after the second world war, but the program did not actually begin until the late 1950s. eight years later, france conducted its first thermonuclear test above fangatuafa atoll. it had a yield of 2.6 megatons.[26]  this bomb significantly contaminated the atoll with radiation for six years, making it off-limits to humans. during the cold war, the french nuclear deterrent was centered around the force de frappe, a nuclear triad consisting of dassault mirage iv bombers carrying such nuclear weapons as the an-22 gravity bomb and the asmp stand-off attack missile, pluton and hades ballistic missiles, and the redoutable class submarine armed with strategic nuclear missiles.
the people's republic of china became the fifth nuclear power on october 16, 1964 when it detonated a 25 kiloton uranium-235 bomb in a test codenamed 596[27] at lop nur. in the late 1950s, china began developing nuclear weapons with substantial soviet assistance in exchange for uranium ore. however, the sino-soviet ideological split in the late 1950s developed problems between china and the soviet union. this caused the soviets to cease helping china develop nuclear weapons. however, china continued developing nuclear weapons without soviet support and made remarkable progress in the 1960s.[28] due to soviet/chinese tensions, the chinese might have used nuclear weapons against either the united states or the soviet union in the event of a nuclear war between the united states and the soviet union.[citation needed] during the cold war, the chinese nuclear deterrent consisted of gravity bombs carried aboard h-6 bomber aircraft, missile systems such as the df-2, df-3, and df-4,[29] and in the later stages of the cold war, the type 092 ballistic missile submarine. on june 14, 1967, china detonated its first hydrogen bomb.

cuban missile crisis[edit]
main article: cuban missile crisis
on january 1, 1959, the cuban government fell to communist revolutionaries, propelling fidel castro into power. the soviet union supported and praised castro and his resistance, and the new government was recognized by the soviet government on january 10. when the united states began boycotting cuban sugar, the soviet union began purchasing large quantities to support the cuban economy in return for fuel and eventually placing nuclear ballistic missiles on cuban soil. these missiles would be capable of reaching the united states very quickly. on october 14, 1962, an american spy plane discovered these nuclear missile sites under construction in cuba.[30]
president kennedy immediately called a series of meetings for a small group of senior officials to debate the crisis. the group was split between a militaristic solution and a diplomatic one. president kennedy ordered a naval blockade around cuba and all military forces to defcon 3. as tensions increased, kennedy eventually ordered u.s. military forces to defcon 2. this was the closest the world has been to a nuclear war. while the u.s. military had been ordered to defcon 2, reaching a nuclear war was still a ways off. the theory of mutually assured destruction seems to put the entry into nuclear war an unlikely possibility. while the public perceived the cuban missile crisis as a time of near mass destruction, the leaders of the united states and the soviet union were working behind the sight of the public eye in order to come to a peaceful conclusion. premier khrushchev writes to president kennedy in a telegram on october 26, 1962 saying that, "consequently, if there is no intention to tighten that knot and thereby to doom the world to the catastrophe of thermonuclear war, then let us not only relax the forces pulling on the ends of the rope, let us take measures to untie that knot."[31] it is apparently clear that both men wanted to avoid nuclear war due to mutually assured destruction which leads to the question of just how close the world was from experiencing a nuclear war.
eventually, on october 28, through much discussion between u.s and soviet officials, khrushchev announced that the soviet union would withdraw all missiles from cuba. shortly after, the u.s. withdrew all their nuclear missiles from turkey in secret, which had threatened the soviets. the u.s.'s withdrawal of their jupiter missiles from turkey was kept private for decades after, causing the negotiations between the two nations to appear to the world as a major u.s. victory. this ultimately led to the downfall of premier khrushchev.

détente[edit]
main article: détente
by the 1970s, with the cold war entering its 30th year with no direct conflict between the superpowers, the united states and the soviet union entered a period of reduced conflict, in which the two powers engaged in trade and exchanges with each other. this period known as détente.
this period included negotiation of a number of arms control agreements, building with the nuclear test ban treaty in the 1950s, but with significant new treaties negotiated in the 1970s.   these treaties were only partially successful.  although both states continued to hold massive numbers of nuclear weapons and research more effective technology, the growth in number of warheads was first limited, and later, with the start i, reversed.

treaties[edit]
in 1958, both the u.s. and soviet union agreed to informally suspend nuclear testing.  however, this agreement was ended when the soviets resumed testing in 1961, followed by a series of nuclear tests conducted by the u.s. these events led to much political fallout, as well as the cuban missile crisis in 1962. something had to be done to ease the great tensions between these two countries, so on october 10, 1963, the limited test ban treaty (ltbt) was signed.[32]  this was an agreement between the u.s., the soviet union, and the u.k., which significantly restricted nuclear testing. all atmospheric, underwater, and outer space nuclear testing were agreed to be halted, but testing was still allowed underground. an additional 113 countries have signed this treaty since 1963.
salt i and salt ii limited the size of the states' arsenals.  bans on nuclear testing, anti-ballistic missile systems, and weapons in space all attempted to limit the expansion of the arms race through the partial test ban treaty.
in november, 1969, strategic arms limitation talks (salt) begun. this was primarily due to the economic impact that nuclear testing and production had on both u.s. and soviet economies. the salt i treaty, which was signed in may, 1972, produced an agreement on two significant documents. these were the anti-ballistic missile treaty (abm treaty) and the interim agreement on the limitation of strategic offensive arms.[33]  the abm treaty limited each country to two abm sites, while the interim agreement froze each country's number of intercontinental ballistic missiles (icbms) and submarine-launched ballistic missiles (slbms) at current levels for five years. this treaty significantly reduced nuclear-related costs as well as the risk of nuclear war. however, salt i failed to address how many nuclear warheads could be placed on one missile. a new technology, known as multiple-independently targetable re-entry vehicle (mirv), allowed single missiles to hold and launch multiple nuclear missiles at targets while in mid-air. over the next 10 years, the soviet union and u.s added 12,000 nuclear warheads to their already built arsenals.
throughout the 1970s, both the soviet union and united states replaced old missiles and warheads with newer, more powerful and effective ones.  this continued to worsen soviet-u.s relations. on june 18, 1979, the salt ii treaty was signed in vienna. this treaty limited both sides' nuclear arsenals and technology. however, this treaty as well as the era of the détente ended with the soviet union's invasion of afghanistan in january, 1980.[34]  the united states once again significantly increased military and nuclear spending, while the soviets were unable to respond and continued to pursue the détente.
in 1991, the start (strategic arms reduction treaty) was negotiated between the u. s. and the soviet union, to reduce the number and limit the capabilities of limitation of strategic offensive arms. this was eventually succeeded by the start ii, start iii, and new start treaties.

reagan and the strategic defense initiative[edit]
main article: strategic defense initiative
despite détente, both sides continued to develop and introduce more accurate weapons and weapons with more warheads ("mirvs").  the presidency of ronald reagan proposed a missile defense programmed tagged the strategic defense initiative, a space based anti-ballistic missile system derided as "star wars" by its critics; simultaneously, missile defense was also being researched in the soviet union. however, the sdi would require technology that had not yet been developed, or even researched. this system proposed both space- and earth-based laser battle stations. it would also need sensors on the ground, in the air, and in space with radar, optical, and infrared technology to detect incoming missiles.[35]  simultaneously, however, reagan initiated negotiations with mikhail gorbachev ultimately resulting in the strategic arms reduction treaty on reducing nuclear stockpiles.
due to high costs and complex technology for its time, the scope of the sdi project was reduced from defense against a massive attack to a system for defending against limited attacks, transitioning into the ballistic missile defense organization.

the end of the cold war[edit]
main article: cold war (1985–1991)
during the mid-1980s, the u.s-soviet relations significantly improved, mikhail gorbachev assumed control of the soviet union after the deaths of several former soviet leaders, and announced a new era of perestroika and glasnost, meaning restructuring and openness respectively. gorbachev proposed a 50% reduction of nuclear weapons for both the u.s and soviet union at the meeting in reykjavik, iceland in october 1986. however, the proposal was refused due to disagreements over reagan's sdi. instead, the intermediate nuclear forces (inf) treaty was signed on december 8, 1987 in washington, which eliminated an entire class of nuclear weapons.[36]
due to the dramatic economic and social changes occurring within the soviet union, many of its constituent republics began to declare their independence. with the wave of revolutions sweeping across eastern-europe, the soviet union was unable to impose its will on its satellite states and so its sphere of influence slowly diminished. by december 16, 1991, all of the republics had declared independence from the union. the soviet leader, mikhail gorbachev resigned as the country's president on december 25 and the soviet union was declared non-existent the following day.

post–cold war[edit]
the examples and perspective in this article may not include all significant viewpoints. please improve the article or discuss the issue. (december 2016) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
main article: effects of the cold war
with the end of the cold war, the united states and russia cut down on nuclear weapons spending.[citation needed] fewer new systems were developed and both arsenals were reduced; although both countries maintain significant stocks of nuclear missiles. in the united states, stockpile stewardship programs have taken over the role of maintaining the aging arsenal.[37]
after the cold war ended, large inventories of nuclear weapons and facilities remained. some are being recycled, dismantled, or recovered as valuable substances.[citation needed] as a result, a large amount of resources and money which was once spent on developing nuclear weapons in soviet union was then spent on repairing the environmental damage produced by the nuclear arms race, and almost all former production sites are now major cleanup sites.[citation needed] in the united states, the plutonium production facility at hanford, washington and the plutonium pit fabrication facility at rocky flats, colorado are among the most polluted sites.[citation needed]
military policies and strategies have been modified to reflect the increasing intervals without major confrontation. in 1995, united states policy and strategy regarding nuclear proliferation was outlined in the document "essentials of post–cold war deterrence", produced by the policy subcommittee of the strategic advisory group (sag) of the united states strategic command.
on april 8, 2010, former u.s. president barack obama and russian president dmitry medvedev signed the new start treaty, which called for a fifty percent reduction of strategic nuclear missile launchers and a curtailment of deployed nuclear warheads.[38] the u.s. senate ratified the treaty in december 2010 by a three-quarter majority.
on december 22, 2016, u.s. president donald trump proclaimed in a tweet that "the united states must greatly strengthen and expand its nuclear capability until such time as the world comes to its senses regarding nukes,"[39] effectively challenging the world to re-engage in a race for nuclear dominance. the next day, trump reiterated his position to morning joe host mika brzezinski of msnbc, stating: "let it be an arms race. we will outmatch them at every pass and outlast them all."[40]

india and pakistan[edit]
further information: india and weapons of mass destruction and pakistan and weapons of mass destruction
in south asia, india and pakistan have also engaged in a technological nuclear arms race since the 1970s. the nuclear competition started in 1974 with india detonating the device, codename smiling buddha, at the pokhran region of the rajasthan state.[41] the indian government termed this test as a "peaceful nuclear explosion", but according to independent sources, it was actually part of an accelerated covert nuclear program of india.[42]
this test generated great concern and doubts in pakistan, with fear it would be at the mercy of its long–time arch rival. pakistan had its own covert atomic bomb projects in 1972 which extended over many years since the first indian weapon was detonated. after the 1974 test, pakistan's atomic bomb program picked up a great speed and accelerated its atomic project to successfully build its own atomic weapons program. in the last few decades of the 20th century, india and pakistan began to develop nuclear-capable rockets and nuclear military technologies. finally, in 1998 india, under atal bihari vajpayee government, test detonated 5 more nuclear weapons. while the international response to the detonation was muted,[citation needed] domestic pressure within pakistan began to build steam and prime minister nawaz sharif ordered the test, detonated 6 nuclear war weapons (chagai-i and chagai-ii) in a tit-for-tat fashion and to act as a deterrent.

defense against nuclear attacks[edit]
main article: missile defense
from the beginning of the cold war, the united states, russia, and other nations have all attempted to develop anti-ballistic missiles. the united states developed the lim-49 nike zeus in the 1950s in order to destroy incoming icbms.
russia has, too, developed abm missiles in the form of the a-35 anti-ballistic missile system and the later a-135 anti-ballistic missile system. chinese state media has also announced to have tested anti-ballistic missiles,[43] though specific information is not public.
india has successfully developed its ballistic missile shield in the programme indian ballistic missile defence programme with the test fire of prithvi air defense (pad) and it has also developed a cruise missile defense akash air defense (aad)[44] to intercept low flying missiles making india one of the five countries with missile shield.
[45]

see also[edit]
nuclear warfare
essentials of post–cold war deterrence
deterrence theory
nuclear disarmament
historical nuclear weapons stockpiles and nuclear tests by country
space race
brinkmanship
brinkmanship (cold war)
references[edit]


^ "key issues: nuclear weapons: history: pre cold war: manhattan project". nuclearfiles.org..mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/65/lock-green.svg/9px-lock-green.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d6/lock-gray-alt-2.svg/9px-lock-gray-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/aa/lock-red-alt-2.svg/9px-lock-red-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration{color:#555}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration span{border-bottom:1px dotted;cursor:help}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/wikisource-logo.svg/12px-wikisource-logo.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output code.cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:inherit;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#33aa33;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-right{padding-right:0.2em}

^ "the soviet nuclear weapons program". nuclearweaponarchive.org.

^ the potsdam conference between allied forces archived 2007-10-24 at the wayback machine

^ "atomic bomb: decision - truman tells stalin, july 24, 1945". dannen.com.

^ "atomic bomb: decision - truman tells stalin, july 24, 1945". dannen.com.

^ a b potsdam note (animation) archived 2007-11-16 at the wayback machine

^ klaus fuchs: atom bomb spy

^ mike fisk, chief information officer, los alamos national laboratory, operated los alamos national security, llc, for the u.s. department of energy. "our history". lanl.gov.cs1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)

^ "atomic espionage".

^ "the beginnings of the cold war". retrieved 24 november 2012.

^ "operation crossroads". retrieved 24 november 2012.

^ "the mike test". retrieved 24 november 2012.

^ "the soviet atomic bomb". retrieved 24 november 2012.

^ "the bravo test".

^ "the soviet response".

^ "more accurate than the "race" metaphor is the observation that if it was a contest at all, the americans walked while the soviets trotted. there was no race-but to the extent that there was an arms competition, it was almost entirely on the soviets side, first to catch up and then to surpass the americans." --herman kahn (1962) thinking about the unthinkable, horizon press.

^ gerald segal, the simon & schuster guide to the world today, (simon & schuster, 1987), p. 82

^ edwin bacon, mark sandle, "brezhnev reconsidered", studies in russian and east european history and society (palgrave macmillan, 2003)

^ "404w page not found (dtic)". dtic.mil.

^ "united kingdom nuclear forces". fas.org.

^ "china nuclear forces". fas.org.

^ "france nuclear forces". fas.org.

^ "australian institute of criminology -   page not found". aic.gov.au. 2018-10-21.

^ "britain goes nuclear".

^ chapitre ii, les premiers essais français au sahara : 1960-1966 senat.fr (in french)

^ "france joins the club".

^ "china's nuclear weapons". nuclearweaponarchive.org.

^ "chinese nuclear weapons".

^ "theater missile systems". fas.org.

^ "cuban missile crisis".

^ "document 65 - foreign relations of the united states, 1961–1963, volume vi, kennedy-khrushchev exchanges - historical documents - office of the historian." document 65 - foreign relations of the united states, 1961–1963, volume vi, kennedy-khrushchev exchanges - historical documents - office of the historian. accessed october 30, 2014.

^ "limited test ban treaty".

^ "easing the tensions".

^ "the arms race resumes".

^ "reagan's star wars".

^ "the end of the cold war".

^ masco, joseph (2006). the nuclear borderlands: the manhattan project in post-cold war new mexico (paperback ed.). princeton university press. p. 78. isbn 978-0-691-12077-5.

^ "what's the arms race? a short history".

^ "trump's call for an 'arms race' flabbergasts nuclear experts".

^ pilkington, ed; pengelly, martin (2016-12-24). "'let it be an arms race': donald trump appears to double down on nuclear expansion". the guardian.

^ "india's nuclear weapons program - smiling buddha: 1974". nuclearweaponarchive.org.

^ files. "1974 nuclear files". nuclear age peace foundation. nuclear files archives. retrieved 14 january 2013.

^ tania branigan (2010-01-12). "china 'successfully tests missile interceptor'". the guardian.

^ "akash missile achieves direct-hit, destroys banshee target". the new indian express.

^ indian ballistic missile defence programme


boughton, g. j. (1974). journal of interamerican studies and world affairs (16th ed.). miami, united states of america: center for latin american studies at the university of miami.
brown, a. reform, coup and collapse: the end of the soviet state. bbc history. retrieved november 22, 2012
cold war: a brief history. (n.d.). atomic archive. retrieved november 16, 2012
doty, p., carnesale, a., & nacht, m. (1976, october). the race to control nuclear arms.
jones, r. w. (1998). pakistan's nuclear posture: arms race instabilities in south asia.
joyce, a., bates graber, r., hoffman, t. j., paul shaw, r., & wong, y. (1989, february). the nuclear arms race: an evolutionary perspective.
maloney, s. m. (2007). learning to love the bomb: canada's nuclear weapons during the cold war. washington, d.c: potomac books.
may, e. r. (n.d.). john f kennedy and the cuban missile crisis. bbc history. retrieved november 22, 2012
van, c. m. (1993). nuclear proliferation and the future of conflict. new york, united states: free press.
further reading[edit]
"presidency in the nuclear age", conference and forum at the jfk library, boston, october 12, 2009. four panels: "the race to build the bomb and the decision to use it", "cuban missile crisis and the first nuclear test ban treaty", "the cold war and the nuclear arms race", and "nuclear weapons, terrorism, and the presidency".
external links[edit]
erik ringmar, "the recognition game: soviet russia against the west," cooperation & conflict, 37:2, 2002. pp. 115–36. -- the arms race between the superpowers explained through the concept of recognition.
annotated bibliography on the nuclear arms race from the alsos digital library for nuclear issues
vtenuclear technologyscience
chemistry
engineering
physics
atomic nucleus
fission
fusion
radiation
ionizing
braking
fuel
tritium
deuterium
helium-3
fertile material
fissile material
isotope separation
nuclear material
uranium
enriched
depleted
plutonium
thorium
neutron
activation
capture
poison
cross section
generator
radiation
reflector
temperature
thermal
fast
fusion
power
by country
power plant
economics
multi-mission radioisotope thermoelectric generator
accidents and incidents
policy
fusion
radioisotope thermoelectric (rtg)
propulsion
rocket
safety and security
medicineimaging
radball
scintigraphy
single-photon emission (spect)
positron-emission tomography (pet)
therapy
fast-neutron
neutron capture therapy of cancer
targeted alpha-particle
proton-beam
tomotherapy
brachytherapy
radiation therapy
radiosurgery
radiopharmacology
weaponstopics
arms race
delivery
design
disarmament
ethics
explosion
effects
history
proliferation
testing
high-altitude
underground
warfare
yield
tnte
lists
estimated death tolls from attacks
states with nuclear weapons
tests
united states
wmd treaties
weapon-free zones
weapons
wasteproducts
actinide
reprocessed uranium
reactor-grade plutonium
minor actinide
activation
fission
llfp
actinide chemistry
disposal
fuel cycle
high-level (hlw)
low-level (llw)
repository
reprocessing
spent fuel
pool
cask
transmutation
debate
nuclear power
nuclear weapons
blue ribbon commission on america's nuclear future
anti-nuclear movement
uranium mining
nuclear power phase-out
nuclear reactorsfissionmoderatorlight water
aqueous homogeneous
boiling
bwr
abwr
esbwr
kerena
pressurized
ap1000
apr-1400
apr+
apwr
atmea1
cap1400
cpr-1000
epr
hpr-1000
acpr1000
acp1000
vver
many others
supercritical (scwr)
natural fission
heavy waterd2o
pressurized
candu
candu 6
candu 9
ec6
afcr
acr-1000
ahwr
cvtr
iphwr-x
phwr kwu
mzfr
r3
r4 marviken
h2o
hwlwr
atr
hw blwr 250
steam-generating (sghwr)
organic
wr-1
co2
hwgcr
el-4
ks 150
kkn
graphite .mw-parser-output .nobold{font-weight:normal}by coolantwaterh2o
am-1
amb-x
egp-6
rbmk
gasco2
uranium naturel graphite gaz (ungg)
magnox
advanced gas-cooled (agr)
he
gtmhr
mhr-t
uhtrex
vhtr (htgr)
pbr (pbmr)
avr
htr-10
htr-pm
thtr-300
pmr
molten-saltfluorides
fuji msr
liquid-fluoride thorium reactor (lftr)
molten-salt reactor experiment (msre)
integral molten salt reactor (imsr)
thorcon
none(fast-neutron)
breeder (fbr)
integral (ifr)
liquid-metal-cooled (lmfr)
small sealed transportable autonomous (sstar)
traveling-wave (twr)
energy multiplier module (em2)
reduced-moderation (rmwr)
fast breeder test reactor (fbtr)
dual fluid reactor (dfr)
generation iv
sodium (sfr)
bn-350
bn-600
bn-800
bn-1200
cfr-600
phénix
superphénix
pfbr
cefr
pfr
prism
lead (lfr)
helium gas (gfr)
others
organically moderated and cooled reactor
arbus
piqua
aircraft reactor experiment

fusionby confinementmagnetic
field-reversed configuration
levitated dipole
reversed field pinch
spheromak
stellarator
tokamak
inertial
bubble (acoustic)
fusor
electrostatic
laser-driven
magnetized-target
z-pinch
other
dense plasma focus
migma
muon-catalyzed
polywell
pyroelectric

 category
portal
 commons

vtecold war
usa
ussr
anzus
nato
non-aligned movement
seato
warsaw pact
cold war ii
1940s
morgenthau plan
hukbalahap rebellion
jamaican conflict
dekemvriana
percentages agreement
yalta conference
guerrilla war in the baltic states
forest brothers
operation priboi
operation jungle
occupation of the baltic states
cursed soldiers
operation unthinkable
operation downfall
potsdam conference
gouzenko affair
division of korea
operation masterdom
operation beleaguer
operation blacklist forty
iran crisis of 1946
greek civil war
baruch plan
corfu channel incident
turkish straits crisis
restatement of policy on germany
first indochina war
truman doctrine
asian relations conference
may 1947 crises
marshall plan
comecon
1948 czechoslovak coup d'état
al-wathbah uprising
1947–1949 palestine war
1947–1948 civil war in mandatory palestine
1948 arab–israeli war
1948 palestinian exodus
tito–stalin split
berlin blockade
western betrayal
iron curtain
eastern bloc
western bloc
chinese civil war (second round)
malayan emergency
albanian subversion
1950s
papua conflict
bamboo curtain
korean war
mccarthyism
algerian war
egyptian revolution of 1952
1953 iranian coup d'état
uprising of 1953 in east germany
bricker amendment
1954 guatemalan coup d'état
partition of vietnam
jebel akhdar war
vietnam war
first taiwan strait crisis
cyprus crisis (1955–64)
geneva summit (1955)
bandung conference
poznań 1956 protests
hungarian revolution of 1956
yemeni–adenese clan violence
suez crisis
"we will bury you"
ifni war
operation gladio
arab cold war
syrian crisis of 1957
1958 lebanon crisis
iraqi 14 july revolution
sputnik crisis
second taiwan strait crisis
1959 tibetan uprising
1959 mosul uprising
cuban revolution
kitchen debate
sino-soviet split
1960s
congo crisis
simba rebellion
1960 u-2 incident
bay of pigs invasion
1960 turkish coup d'état
soviet–albanian split
iraqi–kurdish conflict
first iraqi–kurdish war
berlin crisis of 1961
berlin wall
dirty war (mexico)
portuguese colonial war
angolan war of independence
guinea-bissau war of independence
mozambican war of independence
cuban missile crisis
el porteñazo
sino-indian war
communist insurgency in sarawak
iraqi ramadan revolution
eritrean war of independence
sand war
north yemen civil war
aden emergency
1963 syrian coup d'état
assassination of john f. kennedy
vietnam war
shifta war
guatemalan civil war
colombian conflict
1964 brazilian coup d'état
dominican civil war
rhodesian bush war
south african border war
transition to the new order (indonesia)
domino theory
asean declaration
laotian civil war
1966 syrian coup d'état
argentine revolution
korean dmz conflict
greek military junta of 1967–1974
years of lead (italy)
uss pueblo incident
six-day war
war of attrition
dhofar rebellion
al-wadiah war
biafran war
protests of 1968
french may
tlatelolco massacre
cultural revolution
prague spring
1968 polish political crisis
communist insurgency in malaysia
invasion of czechoslovakia
iraqi ba'athist revolution
1969 libyan coup d'état
goulash communism
sino-soviet border conflict
cpp–npa–ndf rebellion
corrective move
1970s
détente
nuclear non-proliferation treaty
black september in jordan
corrective movement (syria)
western sahara conflict
nicaraguan revolution
cambodian civil war
vietnam war
koza riot
realpolitik
ping-pong diplomacy
uganda–tanzania war
1971 turkish military memorandum
corrective revolution (egypt)
four power agreement on berlin
bangladesh liberation war
1972 nixon visit to china
north yemen-south yemen border conflict of 1972
yemenite war of 1972
communist insurgency in bangladesh
eritrean civil wars
1973 uruguayan coup d'état
1973 chilean coup d'état
yom kippur war
1973 oil crisis
carnation revolution
spanish transition
metapolitefsi
strategic arms limitation talks
second iraqi–kurdish war
angolan civil war
mozambican civil war
oromo conflict
ogaden war
western sahara war
ethiopian civil war
lebanese civil war
sino-albanian split
cambodian–vietnamese war
operation condor
dirty war (argentina)
1976 argentine coup d'état
libyan–egyptian war
german autumn
korean air lines flight 902
ndf rebellion
chadian–libyan conflict
yemenite war of 1979
grand mosque seizure
iranian revolution
saur revolution
sino-vietnamese war
new jewel movement
1979 herat uprising
seven days to the river rhine
struggle against political abuse of psychiatry in the soviet union
1980s
soviet–afghan war
1980 and 1984 summer olympics boycotts
peruvian conflict
1980 turkish coup d'état
gulf of sidra incident
casamance conflict
ugandan bush war
lord's resistance army insurgency
eritrean civil wars
1982 ethiopian–somali border war
ndogboyosoi war
united states invasion of grenada
able archer 83
star wars
iran–iraq war
somali rebellion
1986 black sea incident
south yemen civil war
toyota war
1988 black sea bumping incident
bougainville civil war
8888 uprising
solidarity
soviet reaction
contras
central american crisis
ryan
korean air lines flight 007
people power revolution
glasnost
perestroika
nagorno-karabakh war
afghan civil war
united states invasion of panama
1988 polish strikes
tiananmen square protests of 1989
revolutions of 1989
fall of the berlin wall
velvet revolution
romanian revolution
peaceful revolution
die wende
1990s
mongolian revolution of 1990
gulf war
german reunification
yemeni unification
fall of communism in albania
breakup of yugoslavia
dissolution of czechoslovakia
dissolution of the soviet union
frozen conflicts
abkhazia
china-taiwan
korea
puerto rico
kosovo
nagorno-karabakh
south ossetia
transnistria
sino-indian border dispute
north borneo dispute
foreign policy
truman doctrine
containment
eisenhower doctrine
domino theory
hallstein doctrine
kennedy doctrine
peaceful coexistence
ostpolitik
johnson doctrine
brezhnev doctrine
nixon doctrine
ulbricht doctrine
carter doctrine
reagan doctrine
rollback
sovereignty of puerto rico during the cold war
ideologiescapitalism
liberalism
chicago school
keynesianism
monetarism
neoclassical economics
reaganomics
supply-side economics
thatcherism
communism
socialism
marxism–leninism
castroism
eurocommunism
guevarism
hoxhaism
juche
maoism
trotskyism
naxalism
stalinism
titoism
other
imperialism
anti-imperialism
nationalism
ethnic nationalism
zionism
fascism
neo-nazism
islamism
totalitarianism
authoritarianism
autocracy
liberal democracy
illiberal democracy
guided democracy
social democracy
third-worldism
white supremacy
white nationalism
white separatism
apartheid
organizations
nato
warsaw pact
asean
cia
comecon
eec
kgb
mi6
non-aligned movement
saarc
safari club
stasi
propaganda
active measures
crusade for freedom
izvestia
pravda
radio free europe/radio liberty
red scare
tass
voice of america
voice of russia
races
arms race
nuclear arms race
space race
see also
allied intervention in the russian civil war
list of eastern bloc agents in the united states
soviet espionage in the united states
soviet union–united states relations
ussr–usa summits
russian espionage in the united states
american espionage in the soviet union and russian federation
russia–nato relations
brinkmanship
cia and the cultural cold war
cold war ii
russian revolution
war on terror

category
commons
portal
timeline
list of conflicts

nuclear technology portalweapons of mass destruction portal



 
						retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=nuclear_arms_race&oldid=881346654"					
categories: weapons of the cold warnuclear weaponsnuclear weapons of the united statesnuclear weapons program of the soviet uniongeopolitical rivalrysoviet union–united states relationsindia–pakistan relationsforeign relations of the soviet uniontechnological raceshidden categories: webarchive template wayback linkscs1 maint: multiple names: authors listall articles with unsourced statementsarticles with unsourced statements from august 2014wikipedia articles needing clarification from december 2017articles with unsourced statements from september 2015articles with unsourced statements from october 2007articles needing more viewpoints from december 2016articles with unsourced statements from december 2016articles with unsourced statements from october 2009 



navigation menu


personal tools

not logged intalkcontributionscreate accountlog in 



namespaces

articletalk 




variants







views

readeditview history 



more





search



 







navigation


main pagecontentsfeatured contentcurrent eventsrandom articledonate to wikipediawikipedia store 



interaction


helpabout wikipediacommunity portalrecent changescontact page 



tools


what links hererelated changesupload filespecial pagespermanent linkpage informationwikidata itemcite this page 



print/export


create a bookdownload as pdfprintable version 



languages


العربيةfrançais한국어հայերենitalianolietuviųmagyarnederlandsportuguêsрусскийsimple englishsvenska中文 
edit links 





 this page was last edited on 1 february 2019, at 23:33 (utc).
text is available under the creative commons attribution-sharealike license;
additional terms may apply.  by using this site, you agree to the terms of use and privacy policy. wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the wikimedia foundation, inc., a non-profit organization.


privacy policy
about wikipedia
disclaimers
contact wikipedia
developers
cookie statement
mobile view



 

 



(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgpageparsereport":{"limitreport":{"cputime":"0.848","walltime":"1.022","ppvisitednodes":{"value":3962,"limit":1000000},"ppgeneratednodes":{"value":0,"limit":1500000},"postexpandincludesize":{"value":280072,"limit":2097152},"templateargumentsize":{"value":6876,"limit":2097152},"expansiondepth":{"value":15,"limit":40},"expensivefunctioncount":{"value":9,"limit":500},"unstrip-depth":{"value":1,"limit":20},"unstrip-size":{"value":103073,"limit":5000000},"entityaccesscount":{"value":0,"limit":400},"timingprofile":["100.00%  728.228      1 -total"," 37.19%  270.816      1 template:reflist"," 28.18%  205.229     33 template:cite_web"," 19.65%  143.075     10 template:citation_needed"," 16.89%  122.993     10 template:fix"," 12.84%   93.520      1 template:nuclear_technology"," 12.26%   89.291      1 template:navbox_with_collapsible_groups"," 10.30%   75.005     12 template:navbox","  9.06%   65.954     22 template:category_handler","  8.33%   60.688     11 template:delink"]},"scribunto":{"limitreport-timeusage":{"value":"0.374","limit":"10.000"},"limitreport-memusage":{"value":6460096,"limit":52428800}},"cachereport":{"origin":"mw1269","timestamp":"20190214233200","ttl":2073600,"transientcontent":false}}});});
{"@context":"https:\/\/schema.org","@type":"article","name":"nuclear arms race","url":"https:\/\/en.wikipedia.org\/wiki\/nuclear_arms_race","sameas":"http:\/\/www.wikidata.org\/entity\/q550452","mainentity":"http:\/\/www.wikidata.org\/entity\/q550452","author":{"@type":"organization","name":"contributors to wikimedia projects"},"publisher":{"@type":"organization","name":"wikimedia foundation, inc.","logo":{"@type":"imageobject","url":"https:\/\/www.wikimedia.org\/static\/images\/wmf-hor-googpub.png"}},"datepublished":"2004-04-09t14:54:18z","datemodified":"2019-02-01t23:33:01z","image":"https:\/\/upload.wikimedia.org\/wikipedia\/commons\/b\/bb\/us_and_ussr_nuclear_stockpiles.svg"}
(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgbackendresponsetime":116,"wghostname":"mw1256"});});


