



franklin d. roosevelt - wikipedia
document.documentelement.classname = document.documentelement.classname.replace( /(^|\s)client-nojs(\s|$)/, "$1client-js$2" );
(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgcanonicalnamespace":"","wgcanonicalspecialpagename":false,"wgnamespacenumber":0,"wgpagename":"franklin_d._roosevelt","wgtitle":"franklin d. roosevelt","wgcurrevisionid":883677882,"wgrevisionid":883677882,"wgarticleid":10979,"wgisarticle":true,"wgisredirect":false,"wgaction":"view","wgusername":null,"wgusergroups":["*"],"wgcategories":["articles with short description","wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages","good articles","use american english from october 2017","all wikipedia articles written in american english","use mdy dates from february 2019","pages using sidebar with the child parameter","articles with haudio microformats","cs1: long volume value","articles with curlie links","articles with project gutenberg links","articles with librivox links","articles with internet archive links","wikipedia articles with bibsys identifiers","wikipedia articles with bne identifiers","wikipedia articles with bnf identifiers","wikipedia articles with gnd identifiers","wikipedia articles with isni identifiers","wikipedia articles with kulturnav identifiers","wikipedia articles with lccn identifiers","wikipedia articles with musicbrainz identifiers","wikipedia articles with nara identifiers","wikipedia articles with ndl identifiers","wikipedia articles with nkc identifiers","wikipedia articles with nla identifiers","wikipedia articles with selibr identifiers","wikipedia articles with snac-id identifiers","wikipedia articles with sudoc identifiers","wikipedia articles with ulan identifiers","wikipedia articles with viaf identifiers","wikipedia articles with worldcat-viaf identifiers","ac with 17 elements","articles containing video clips","1882 births","1945 deaths","20th-century american politicians","20th-century presidents of the united states","american anti-fascists","american odd fellows","american people in the venona papers","american philatelic society","american philatelists","american politicians with physical disabilities","american social democrats","anti-imperialism","burials in new york (state)","columbia law school alumni","delano family","democratic party (united states) vice presidential nominees","democratic party presidents of the united states","democratic party state governors of the united states","dutchess county, new york politicians","eleanor roosevelt","franklin d. roosevelt","freemason united states presidents","freemen of the city of london","governors of new york (state)","groton school alumni","hall of fame for great americans inductees","harvard college alumni","harvard crimson alumni","knights grand cross of the military order of william","new york (state) democrats","new york (state) lawyers","new york state senators","new deal","people from hyde park, new york","politicians with paraplegia","presidents of the united states","presidents of the united states who died while in office","roosevelt family","sons of the american revolution","liberalism in the united states","1932 united states presidential candidates","1936 united states presidential candidates","1940 united states presidential candidates","1944 united states presidential candidates","united states assistant secretaries of the navy","1920 united states vice-presidential candidates","world war ii political leaders","roosevelt institute"],"wgbreakframes":false,"wgpagecontentlanguage":"en","wgpagecontentmodel":"wikitext","wgseparatortransformtable":["",""],"wgdigittransformtable":["",""],"wgdefaultdateformat":"dmy","wgmonthnames":["","january","february","march","april","may","june","july","august","september","october","november","december"],"wgmonthnamesshort":["","jan","feb","mar","apr","may","jun","jul","aug","sep","oct","nov","dec"],"wgrelevantpagename":"franklin_d._roosevelt","wgrelevantarticleid":10979,"wgrequestid":"xgvu8apaaeqaaisczgwaaabu","wgcspnonce":false,"wgisprobablyeditable":false,"wgrelevantpageisprobablyeditable":false,"wgrestrictionedit":["autoconfirmed"],"wgrestrictionmove":["sysop"],"wgflaggedrevsparams":{"tags":{}},"wgstablerevisionid":null,"wgcategorytreepagecategoryoptions":"{\"mode\":0,\"hideprefix\":20,\"showcount\":true,\"namespaces\":false}","wgwikieditorenabledmodules":[],"wgbetafeaturesfeatures":[],"wgmediavieweronclick":true,"wgmediaviewerenabledbydefault":true,"wgpopupsshouldsendmoduletouser":true,"wgpopupsconflictswithnavpopupgadget":false,"wgvisualeditor":{"pagelanguagecode":"en","pagelanguagedir":"ltr","pagevariantfallbacks":"en","usepageimages":true,"usepagedescriptions":true},"wgmfispagecontentmodeleditable":true,"wgmfenablefontchanger":true,"wgmfdisplaywikibasedescriptions":{"search":true,"nearby":true,"watchlist":true,"tagline":false},"wgrelatedarticles":null,"wgrelatedarticlesusecirrussearch":true,"wgrelatedarticlesonlyusecirrussearch":false,"wgwmeschemaeditattemptstepoversample":false,"wgpoweredbyhhvm":true,"wgulscurrentautonym":"english","wgnoticeproject":"wikipedia","wgcentralnoticecookiestodelete":[],"wgcentralnoticecategoriesusinglegacy":["fundraising","fundraising"],"wgwikibaseitemid":"q8007","wgscorenotelanguages":{"arabic":"العربية","catalan":"català","deutsch":"deutsch","english":"english","espanol":"español","italiano":"italiano","nederlands":"nederlands","norsk":"norsk","portugues":"português","suomi":"suomi","svenska":"svenska","vlaams":"west-vlams"},"wgscoredefaultnotelanguage":"nederlands","wgcentralauthmobiledomain":false,"wgcodemirrorenabled":true,"wgvisualeditortoolbarscrolloffset":0,"wgvisualeditorunsupportededitparams":["undo","undoafter","veswitched"],"wgeditsubmitbuttonlabelpublish":true,"oreswikiid":"enwiki","oresbaseurl":"http://ores.discovery.wmnet:8081/","oresapiversion":3});mw.loader.state({"ext.gadget.charinsert-styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site.styles":"ready","site.styles":"ready","noscript":"ready","user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site":"ready","user":"ready","user.options":"ready","user.tokens":"loading","ext.cite.styles":"ready","ext.tmh.thumbnail.styles":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.shared":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.commonprint":"ready","mediawiki.toc.styles":"ready","wikibase.client.init":"ready","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.noscript":"ready","ext.uls.interlanguage":"ready","ext.wikimediabadges":"ready","ext.3d.styles":"ready","mediawiki.skinning.interface":"ready","skins.vector.styles":"ready"});mw.loader.implement("user.tokens@0tffind",function($,jquery,require,module){/*@nomin*/mw.user.tokens.set({"edittoken":"+\\","patroltoken":"+\\","watchtoken":"+\\","csrftoken":"+\\"});
});rlpagemodules=["ext.cite.ux-enhancements","mw.mediawikiplayer.loader","mw.popupmediatransform","mw.tmhgalleryhook.js","ext.scribunto.logs","site","mediawiki.page.startup","mediawiki.page.ready","mediawiki.toc","mediawiki.searchsuggest","ext.gadget.teahouse","ext.gadget.referencetooltips","ext.gadget.watchlist-notice","ext.gadget.drn-wizard","ext.gadget.charinsert","ext.gadget.reftoolbar","ext.gadget.extra-toolbar-buttons","ext.gadget.switcher","ext.centralauth.centralautologin","mmv.head","mmv.bootstrap.autostart","ext.popups","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.init","ext.visualeditor.targetloader","ext.eventlogging","ext.wikimediaevents","ext.navigationtiming","ext.uls.eventlogger","ext.uls.init","ext.uls.compactlinks","ext.uls.interface","ext.quicksurveys.init","ext.centralnotice.geoip","ext.centralnotice.startup","skins.vector.js"];mw.loader.load(rlpagemodules);});





















 







franklin d. roosevelt 
from wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 jump to navigation
jump to search
"fdr" and "franklin roosevelt" redirect here. for other uses, see fdr (disambiguation) and franklin roosevelt (disambiguation).
32nd president of the united states


franklin d. rooseveltphotograph by leon perskie, 194432nd president of the united statesin officemarch 4, 1933 – april 12, 1945vice presidentjohn nance garner(1933–1941)henry a. wallace(1941–1945)harry s. truman(jan.–apr. 1945)preceded byherbert hooversucceeded byharry s. truman44th governor of new yorkin officejanuary 1, 1929 – december 31, 1932lieutenantherbert h. lehmanpreceded byal smithsucceeded byherbert h. lehmanassistant secretary of the navyin officemarch 17, 1913 – august 26, 1920presidentwoodrow wilsonpreceded bybeekman winthropsucceeded bygordon woodburymember of the new york senatefrom the 26th districtin officejanuary 1, 1911 – march 17, 1913preceded byjohn f. schlossersucceeded byjames e. towner
personal detailsbornfranklin delano roosevelt(1882-01-30)january 30, 1882hyde park, new york, u.s.diedapril 12, 1945(1945-04-12) (aged 63)warm springs, georgia, u.s.cause of deathcerebral hemorrhageresting placespringwood estatehyde park, new york, u.s.political partydemocraticspouse(s)eleanor roosevelt (m. 1905)childrenannajamesfranklinelliottfranklin jr.johnparents
james roosevelt i
sara roosevelt
relatives
roosevelt family
delano family
educationharvard university (ba)columbia universitysignature


this article is part of a series aboutfranklin d. roosevelt


early life
family
paralysis
state senator
secretary of the navy
1920 smith-roosevelt campaign


governor of new york
governorship



president of the united states
presidency



first term
1932 campaign
election
1st inauguration
first 100 days
new deal
glass-steagall act
wpa
social security
sec
fireside chats


second term
1936 campaign
election
2nd inauguration
supreme court packing
national recovery act
1937 recession
march of dimes
pre-war foreign policy


third term
1940 campaign
election
3rd inauguration

world war ii
world war ii
attack on pearl harbor
infamy speech
atlantic charter
japanese internment
tehran conference
united nations
d-day
second bill of rights
g.i. bill


fourth term
1944 campaign
election
4th inauguration
yalta conference
declining health
death and state funeral

electoral history
legacy
criticism
new deal critics
civil rights record
presidential library
memorial





vte
franklin delano roosevelt (/ˈroʊzəvəlt/,[1] /-vɛlt/;[2] january 30, 1882 – april 12, 1945), often referred to by his initials fdr, was an american statesman and political leader who served as the 32nd president of the united states from 1933 until his death in 1945. a democrat, he won a record four presidential elections and became a central figure in world events during the first half of the 20th century. roosevelt directed the federal government during most of the great depression, implementing his new deal domestic agenda in response to the worst economic crisis in u.s. history. as a dominant leader of his party, he built the new deal coalition, which realigned american politics into the fifth party system and defined american liberalism throughout the middle third of the 20th century. his third and fourth terms were dominated by world war ii. he is often rated by scholars as one of the three greatest u.s. presidents, along with george washington and abraham lincoln.
roosevelt was born in hyde park, new york, to a dutch american family made well known by theodore roosevelt, the 26th president of the united states and william henry aspinwall. fdr attended groton school, harvard college, and columbia law school, and went on to practice law in new york city. in 1905, he married his fifth cousin once removed, eleanor roosevelt. they had six children. he won election to the new york state senate in 1910, and then served as assistant secretary of the navy under president woodrow wilson during world war i. roosevelt was james m. cox's running mate on the democratic party's 1920 national ticket, but cox was defeated by warren g. harding. in 1921, roosevelt contracted a paralytic illness, believed at the time to be polio, and his legs became permanently paralyzed. while attempting to recover from his condition, roosevelt founded the treatment center in warm springs, georgia, for people with poliomyelitis. in spite of being unable to walk unaided, roosevelt returned to public office by winning election as governor of new york in 1928. he was in office from 1929 to 1933 and served as a reform governor, promoting programs to combat the economic crisis besetting the united states at the time.
in the 1932 presidential election, roosevelt defeated republican president herbert hoover in a landslide. roosevelt took office while the united states was in the midst of the great depression, the worst economic crisis in the country's history. during the first 100 days of the 73rd united states congress, roosevelt spearheaded unprecedented federal legislation and issued a profusion of executive orders that instituted the new deal—a variety of programs designed to produce relief, recovery, and reform. he created numerous programs to provide relief to the unemployed and farmers while seeking economic recovery with the national recovery administration and other programs. he also instituted major regulatory reforms related to finance, communications, and labor, and presided over the end of prohibition. he harnessed radio to speak directly to the american people, giving 30 "fireside chat" radio addresses during his presidency and becoming the first american president to be televised.  the economy having improved rapidly from 1933 to 1936, roosevelt won a landslide reelection in 1936. however, the economy then relapsed into a deep recession in 1937 and 1938. after the 1936 election, roosevelt sought passage of the judiciary reorganization bill of 1937 (the "court packing plan"), which would have expanded the size of the supreme court of the united states. the bipartisan conservative coalition that formed in 1937 prevented passage of the bill and blocked the implementation of further new deal programs and reforms. major surviving programs and legislation implemented under roosevelt include the securities and exchange commission, the national labor relations act, the federal deposit insurance corporation, and social security.
roosevelt ran successfully for reelection in 1940. his victory made him the only u.s. president to serve for more than two terms. with world war ii looming after 1938, roosevelt gave strong diplomatic and financial support to china as well as the united kingdom and the soviet union while the u.s. remained officially neutral. following the japanese attack on pearl harbor on december 7, 1941, an event he famously called "a date which will live in infamy", roosevelt obtained a declaration of war on japan the next day, and a few days later, on germany and italy. assisted by his top aide harry hopkins and with very strong national support, he worked closely with british prime minister winston churchill, soviet leader joseph stalin and chinese generalissimo chiang kai-shek in leading the allies against the axis powers. roosevelt supervised the mobilization of the u.s. economy to support the war effort and implemented a europe first strategy, making the defeat of germany a priority over that of japan. he also initiated the development of the world's first atomic bomb and worked with the other allied leaders to lay the groundwork for the united nations and other post-war institutions. roosevelt won reelection in 1944 but with his physical health declining during the war years, he died in april 1945, just 11 weeks into his fourth term. the axis powers surrendered to the allies in the months following roosevelt's death, during the presidency of roosevelt's successor, harry s. truman.

contents

1 early life and marriage

1.1 childhood and education
1.2 marriage, family, and affairs


2 early political career (1910–1920)

2.1 new york state senator (1910–1912)
2.2 assistant secretary of the navy (1913–1919)
2.3 campaign for vice president (1920)


3 paralytic illness and political comeback (1921–1928)
4 governor of new york (1929–1932)
5 1932 presidential election
6 presidency (1933–1945)

6.1 first and second terms (1933–1941)

6.1.1 first new deal (1933–1934)
6.1.2 second new deal (1935–1936)
6.1.3 landslide re-election, 1936
6.1.4 supreme court fight and second term legislation
6.1.5 conservation and the environment
6.1.6 gnp and unemployment rates
6.1.7 foreign policy (1933–1941)


6.2 election of 1940: breaking with tradition
6.3 third and fourth terms (1941–1945)

6.3.1 lead-up to the war
6.3.2 pearl harbor and declarations of war
6.3.3 war plans
6.3.4 nuclear program
6.3.5 wartime conferences
6.3.6 course of the war
6.3.7 home front
6.3.8 declining health
6.3.9 election of 1944
6.3.10 final months, death and aftermath (1945)




7 civil rights, internment, and the holocaust
8 legacy

8.1 historical reputation
8.2 memorials


9 see also
10 notes
11 references

11.1 works cited


12 further reading

12.1 biographical
12.2 scholarly topical studies
12.3 foreign policy and world war ii
12.4 criticism
12.5 fdr's rhetoric
12.6 historiography
12.7 primary sources


13 external links


early life and marriage
childhood and education
 springwood, the birthplace and lifelong home of franklin roosevelt, located in hyde park, new york
roosevelt was born on january 30, 1882, in the hudson valley town of hyde park, new york, to businessman james roosevelt i and his second wife, sara ann delano. roosevelt's parents, who were sixth cousins,[3] both came from wealthy old new york families, the roosevelts, the aspinwalls and the delanos, respectively. roosevelt's patrilineal ancestor migrated to new amsterdam in the 17th century, and the roosevelts flourished as merchants and landowners.[4] the delano family progenitor traveled to the new world on the mayflower, and the delanos prospered as merchants and shipbuilders in massachusetts.[5] franklin had a half-brother, james "rosy" roosevelt, from his father's previous marriage.[6]

@media all and (max-width:720px){.mw-parser-output .tmulti>.thumbinner{width:100%!important;max-width:none!important}.mw-parser-output .tmulti .tsingle{float:none!important;max-width:none!important;width:100%!important;text-align:center}}a young, unbreeched roosevelt in 1884, 2 years old[a]roosevelt in 1893, at the age of 11roosevelt in 1900, at the age of 18
roosevelt grew up in a wealthy family. his father, james roosevelt i, graduated from harvard law school in 1851, but chose not to practice law after receiving an inheritance from his grandfather, james roosevelt.[6] roosevelt's father was a prominent bourbon democrat who once took franklin to meet president grover cleveland in the white house.[8] sara was the dominant influence in franklin's early years.[9] she once declared, "my son franklin is a delano, not a roosevelt at all."[3] james, who was 54 when franklin was born, was considered by some as a remote father, though biographer james macgregor burns indicates james interacted with his son more than was typical at the time.[10] frequent trips to europe—he made his first excursion at the age of two and went with his parents every year from the ages of seven to fifteen—helped roosevelt become conversant in german and french. at age nine he attended public school in germany.[11][12] he learned to ride, shoot, row, and play polo and lawn tennis. he took up golf in his teen years, becoming a skilled long hitter.[13] he learned to sail and when he was 16, his father gave him a sailboat.[14]
roosevelt attended groton school, an episcopal boarding school in groton, massachusetts. its headmaster, endicott peabody, preached the duty of christians to help the less fortunate and urged his students to enter public service. peabody remained a strong influence throughout roosevelt's life, officiating at his wedding and visiting him as president.[15][16]
like most of his groton classmates, roosevelt went to harvard college.[17] roosevelt was an average student academically,[18] and he later declared, "i took economics courses in college for four years, and everything i was taught was wrong."[19] he was a member of the alpha delta phi fraternity[20] and the fly club.[21] roosevelt was undistinguished as a student or athlete, but he became editor-in-chief of the harvard crimson daily newspaper, a position that required great ambition, energy, and the ability to manage others.[22]
roosevelt's father died in 1900, causing great distress for him.[23] the following year, roosevelt's fifth cousin theodore roosevelt became president of the united states. theodore's vigorous leadership style and reforming zeal made him franklin's role model and hero.[24] roosevelt graduated from harvard in 1903 with an a.b. in history. roosevelt entered columbia law school in 1904, but dropped out in 1907 after passing the new york bar exam.[25][b] in 1908, he took a job with the prestigious wall street firm of carter ledyard & milburn, working in the firm's admiralty law division.[27]

marriage, family, and affairs
 roosevelt with miss mosenthal and theodore douglas robinson during the travel around norway in 1901 (stalheim at voss)
 eleanor and franklin with their first two children, 1908
in mid-1902, franklin began courting his future wife eleanor roosevelt, whom he had been acquainted with as a child.[28] eleanor and franklin were fifth cousins, once removed, and eleanor was a niece of theodore roosevelt.[29] they began corresponding with each other in 1902, and in october 1904, franklin proposed marriage to eleanor.[30]
on march 17, 1905, roosevelt married eleanor in new york city, despite the fierce resistance of his mother.[31] while she did not dislike eleanor, sara roosevelt was very possessive of her son, believing he was too young for marriage. she attempted to break the engagement several times.[32] eleanor's uncle, president theodore roosevelt, stood in at the wedding for eleanor's deceased father, elliott.[33] the young couple moved into springwood, his family's estate at hyde park. the home was owned by sara roosevelt until her death in 1941 and was very much her home as well.[34] in addition, franklin and sara roosevelt did the planning and furnishing of a town house sara had built for the young couple in new york city; sara had a twin house built alongside for herself. eleanor never felt at home in the houses at hyde park or new york, but she loved the family's vacation home on campobello island, which sara gave to the couple.[35]
biographer james macgregor burns said that young roosevelt was self-assured and at ease in the upper class.[36] in contrast, eleanor at the time was shy and disliked social life, and at first stayed at home to raise their several children. like his father had, franklin left the raising of the children to his wife, while eleanor in turn largely relied on hired caregivers to raise the children. referring to her early experience as a mother, she later stated that she knew "absolutely nothing about handling or feeding a baby."[37] although eleanor had an aversion to sexual intercourse and considered it "an ordeal to be endured",[38] she and franklin had six children. anna, james, and elliott were born in 1906, 1907, and 1910, respectively. the couple's second son, franklin, died in infancy in 1909. another son, also named franklin, was born in 1914, and the youngest child, john, was born in 1916.[39]
roosevelt had various extra-marital affairs, including one with eleanor's social secretary lucy mercer, which began soon after she was hired in early 1914.[40] in september 1918, eleanor found letters revealing the affair in roosevelt's luggage. franklin contemplated divorcing eleanor, but sara objected strongly and lucy would not agree to marry a divorced man with five children.[41] franklin and eleanor remained married, and roosevelt promised never to see lucy again. eleanor never truly forgave him, and their marriage from that point on was more of a political partnership.[42] eleanor soon thereafter established a separate home in hyde park at val-kill, and increasingly devoted herself to various social and political causes independently of her husband. the emotional break in their marriage was so severe that when roosevelt asked eleanor in 1942—in light of his failing health—to come back home and live with him again, she refused.[43] he was not always aware of when she visited the white house and for some time she could not easily reach him on the telephone without his secretary's help; roosevelt, in turn, did not visit eleanor's new york city apartment until late 1944.[44]
franklin broke his promise to eleanor to refrain from having affairs. he and lucy maintained a formal correspondence, and began seeing each other again in 1941, or perhaps earlier.[45][46] lucy was with roosevelt on the day he died in 1945. despite this, roosevelt's affair was not widely known until the 1960s.[43] roosevelt's son elliott claimed that his father had a 20-year affair with his private secretary, marguerite "missy" lehand.[47] another son, james, stated that "there is a real possibility that a romantic relationship existed" between his father and crown princess märtha of norway, who resided in the white house during part of world war ii. aides began to refer to her at the time as "the president's girlfriend",[48] and gossip linking the two romantically appeared in the newspapers.[49]

early political career (1910–1920)
new york state senator (1910–1912)
 roosevelt supported governor woodrow wilson in the 1912 presidential election
 theodore roosevelt was franklin roosevelt's distant cousin and an important influence on his career.
roosevelt held little passion for the practice of law and confided to friends that he planned to eventually enter politics.[50] despite his admiration for his cousin, theodore, franklin inherited his father's affiliation with the democratic party.[51] prior to the 1910 elections, the local democratic party recruited roosevelt to run for a seat in the new york state assembly. roosevelt was an attractive recruit for the party because theodore roosevelt was still one of the country's most prominent politicians, and a democratic roosevelt was good publicity; the candidate could also pay for his own campaign.[52] roosevelt's campaign for the state assembly ended after the democratic incumbent, lewis stuyvesant chanler, chose to seek re-election. rather than putting his political hopes on hold, roosevelt ran for a seat in the state senate.[53] the senate district, located in dutchess county, columbia county, and putnam county, was strongly republican.[54] roosevelt feared that open opposition from theodore could effectively end his campaign, but theodore privately encouraged his cousin's candidacy despite their differences in partisan affiliation.[51] acting as his own campaign manager, roosevelt traveled throughout the senate district via automobile at a time when many could not afford cars.[55] due to his aggressive and effective campaign,[56] the roosevelt name's influence in the hudson valley, and the democratic landslide that year, roosevelt won the election, surprising almost everyone.[57]
though legislative sessions rarely lasted more than ten weeks, roosevelt treated his new position as a full-time career.[58] taking his seat on january 1, 1911, roosevelt immediately became the leader of a group of "insurgents" who opposed the bossism of the tammany hall machine that dominated the state democratic party. in the 1911 u.s. senate election, which was determined in a joint session of the new york state legislature,[c] roosevelt and nineteen other democrats caused a prolonged deadlock by opposing a series of tammany-backed candidates. finally, tammany threw its backing behind james a. o'gorman, a highly regarded judge who roosevelt found acceptable, and o'gorman won the election in late march.[59] roosevelt soon became a popular figure among new york democrats, though he had not yet become an eloquent speaker.[57] news articles and cartoons began depicting "the second coming of a roosevelt" that sent "cold shivers down the spine of tammany".[60]
roosevelt, again in opposition to tammany hall, supported new jersey governor woodrow wilson's successful bid for the 1912 democratic nomination, earning an informal designation as an original wilson man.[61] the election became a three-way contest, as theodore roosevelt left the republican party to launch a third party campaign against wilson and sitting republican president william howard taft. franklin's decision to back wilson over theodore roosevelt in the general election alienated some members of his family, although theodore himself was not offended.[62] wilson's victory over the divided republican party made him the first democrat to win a presidential election since 1892. overcoming a bout with typhoid fever, and due to the help of journalist louis mchenry howe, roosevelt was re-elected in the 1912 elections. after the elections, he served as chairman of the agriculture committee, and his success with farm and labor bills was a precursor to his new deal policies twenty years later.[63] by this time he had become more consistently progressive, in support of labor and social welfare programs for women and children; cousin theodore was of some influence on these issues.[64]

assistant secretary of the navy (1913–1919)
 roosevelt as assistant secretary of the navy, 1913
roosevelt's support of wilson led to his appointment in march 1913 as assistant secretary of the navy, the second-ranking official in the navy department after secretary josephus daniels.[65] roosevelt had a lifelong affection for the navy—he had already collected almost 10,000 naval books and claimed to have read all but one—and was more ardent than daniels in supporting a large and efficient naval force.[66][67] with wilson's support, daniels and roosevelt instituted a merit-based promotion system and made other reforms to extend civilian control over the autonomous departments of the navy.[68] roosevelt oversaw the navy's civilian employees and earned the respect of union leaders for his fairness in resolving disputes.[69] not a single strike occurred during his seven-plus years in the office,[70] during which roosevelt gained experience in labor issues, government management during wartime, naval issues, and logistics, all valuable areas for future office.[71]
in 1914, roosevelt made an ill-conceived decision to run for the seat of retiring republican senator elihu root of new york. though roosevelt won the backing of treasury secretary william gibbs mcadoo and governor martin h. glynn, he faced a formidable opponent in the tammany-backed james w. gerard.[72] he also lacked wilson's backing, as wilson needed tammany's forces to help marshal his legislation and secure his 1916 re-election.[73] roosevelt was soundly defeated in the democratic primary by gerard, who in turn lost the general election to republican james wolcott wadsworth jr. roosevelt learned a valuable lesson, that federal patronage alone, without white house support, could not defeat a strong local organization.[74] after the election, roosevelt and the boss of the tammany hall machine, charles francis murphy, sought an accommodation with one another and became political allies.[75]
following his defeat in the senate primary, roosevelt refocused on the navy department.[76] world war i broke out in july 1914, with the central powers of germany, austria-hungary, and the ottoman empire seeking to defeat the allied powers of britain, france, and russia. though he remained publicly supportive of wilson, roosevelt sympathized with the preparedness movement, whose leaders strongly favored the allied powers and called for a military build-up.[77] the wilson administration initiated an expansion of the navy after the sinking of the rms lusitania by a german submarine, and roosevelt helped establish the united states navy reserve and the council of national defense.[78] in april 1917, after germany declared it would engage in unrestricted submarine warfare and attacked several u.s. ships, wilson asked congress for a declaration of war. congress approved the declaration of war on germany on april 6.[79]
roosevelt requested that he be allowed to serve as a naval officer, but wilson insisted that he continue to serve as assistant secretary of the navy. for the next year, roosevelt remained in washington to coordinate the mobilization, supply, and deployment of naval vessels and personnel.[80] in the first six months after the u.s. entered the war, the navy expanded fourfold.[81] in the summer of 1918, roosevelt traveled to europe to inspect naval installations and meet with french and british officials. in september, he returned to the united states on board the uss leviathan, a large troop carrier. on the 11-day voyage, the pandemic influenza virus struck and killed many on board. roosevelt became very ill with influenza and a complicating pneumonia, but he recovered by the time the ship landed in new york.[82][83] after germany signed an armistice in november 1918, surrendering and ending the fighting, daniels and roosevelt supervised the demobilization of the navy.[84] against the advice of older officers such as admiral william benson—who claimed he could not "conceive of any use the fleet will ever have for aviation"—roosevelt personally ordered the preservation of the navy's aviation division.[85] with the wilson administration coming to an end, roosevelt began planning for his next run for office. roosevelt and his associates approached herbert hoover about running for the 1920 democratic presidential nomination, with roosevelt as his running mate.[86]

campaign for vice president (1920)
 cox and roosevelt in ohio, 1920
roosevelt's plan to convince hoover to run for the democratic nomination fell through after hoover publicly declared himself to be a republican, but roosevelt nonetheless decided to seek the 1920 vice presidential nomination. after governor james m. cox of ohio won the party's presidential nomination, he chose roosevelt as his running mate, and the party formally nominated roosevelt by acclamation.[87] although his nomination surprised most people, roosevelt was considered as bringing balance to the ticket as a moderate, a wilsonian, and a prohibitionist with a famous name.[88][89] roosevelt had just turned 38, four years younger than theodore had been when he received the same nomination from his party. roosevelt resigned as assistant secretary of the navy after the democratic convention and campaigned across the nation for the cox–roosevelt ticket.[90]

 1920 electoral vote results
during the campaign, cox and roosevelt defended the wilson administration and the league of nations, both of which were unpopular in 1920.[91] roosevelt personally supported u.s. membership in the league of nations, but, unlike wilson, he favored compromising with senator henry cabot lodge and other "reservationists."[92] the cox–roosevelt ticket was defeated by republicans warren g. harding and calvin coolidge in the presidential election by a wide margin, and the republican ticket carried every state outside of the south.[93] roosevelt accepted the loss without issue and later reflected that the relationships and good will that he built in the 1920 campaign proved to be a major asset in his 1932 campaign. the 1920 election also saw the first public participation of eleanor roosevelt who, with the support of louis howe, established herself as a valuable political ally.[94]

paralytic illness and political comeback (1921–1928)
further information: franklin d. roosevelt's paralytic illness
after the election, roosevelt returned to new york city, where he practiced law and served as a vice president of the fidelity and deposit company.[95] he also sought to build support for a political comeback in the 1922 elections, but his career was derailed by illness.[95] while the roosevelts were vacationing at campobello island in august 1921, roosevelt fell ill. his main symptoms were fever; symmetric, ascending paralysis; facial paralysis; bowel and bladder dysfunction; numbness and hyperesthesia; and a descending pattern of recovery. roosevelt was left permanently paralyzed from the waist down. he was diagnosed with poliomyelitis at the time, but his symptoms are more consistent with guillain–barré syndrome – an autoimmune neuropathy which roosevelt's doctors failed to consider as a diagnostic possibility.[96]

 rare photograph of roosevelt in a wheelchair, with fala and ruthie bie, the daughter of caretakers at his hyde park estate. photo taken by his cousin margaret suckley (february 1941).
though his mother favored his retirement from public life, roosevelt, his wife, and roosevelt's close friend and adviser, louis howe, were all determined that roosevelt continue his political career.[97] roosevelt convinced many people that he was improving, which he believed to be essential prior to running for public office again.[98] he laboriously taught himself to walk short distances while wearing iron braces on his hips and legs by swiveling his torso, supporting himself with a cane.[99] roosevelt was careful never to be seen using his wheelchair in public, and great care was taken to prevent any portrayal in the press that would highlight his disability.[100] however, his disability was well known before and during his presidency and became a major part of his image. he usually appeared in public standing upright, supported on one side by an aide or one of his sons.[101]
beginning in 1925, roosevelt spent most of his time in the southern united states, at first on his houseboat, the larooco.[102] intrigued by the potential benefits of hydrotherapy, he established a rehabilitation center at warm springs, georgia, in 1926. to create the rehabilitation center, roosevelt assembled a staff of physical therapists and used most of his inheritance to purchase the merriweather inn. in 1938, roosevelt founded the national foundation for infantile paralysis, leading to the development of polio vaccines.[103]
roosevelt maintained contacts with the democratic party during the 1920s, and he remained active in new york politics while also establishing contacts in the south, particularly in georgia.[104] roosevelt issued an open letter endorsing al smith's successful campaign in new york's 1922 gubernatorial election, which both aided smith and showed roosevelt's continuing relevance as a political figure.[105] roosevelt and smith came from different backgrounds and never fully trusted one another, but roosevelt supported smith's progressive policies, while smith was happy to have the backing of the prominent and well-respected roosevelt.[106] roosevelt gave presidential nominating speeches for smith at the 1924 and 1928 democratic national conventions; the speech at the 1924 convention marked a return to public life following his illness and convalescence.[107] the democrats were badly divided between an urban wing, led by smith, and a conservative, rural wing, led by william gibbs mcadoo, and the party suffered a landslide defeat in the 1924 presidential election. like many others throughout the united states, roosevelt did not abstain from alcohol during the prohibition era, but publicly he sought to find a compromise on prohibition acceptable to both wings of the party.[108]
in 1925, smith appointed roosevelt to the taconic state park commission, and his fellow commissioners chose him as chairman.[109] in this role, he came into conflict with robert moses, a smith protégé,[109] who was the primary force behind the long island state park commission and the new york state council of parks.[109] roosevelt accused moses of using the name recognition of prominent individuals including roosevelt to win political support for state parks, but then diverting funds to the ones moses favored on long island, while moses worked to block the appointment of howe to a salaried position as the taconic commission's secretary.[109] roosevelt served on the commission until the end of 1928,[110] and his contentious relationship with moses continued as their careers progressed.[111]

governor of new york (1929–1932)
main article: governorship of franklin d. roosevelt
 gov. roosevelt with his predecessor al smith, 1930
as the democratic party presidential nominee in the 1928 election, smith in turn asked roosevelt to run for governor in the state election.[112] roosevelt initially resisted the entreaties of smith and others within the party, as he was reluctant to leave warm springs and feared a republican landslide in 1928.[113] he agreed to run when party leaders convinced him that only he could defeat the republican gubernatorial nominee, new york attorney general albert ottinger.[114] roosevelt won the party's gubernatorial nomination by acclamation, and he once again turned to louis howe to lead his campaign. roosevelt was also joined on the campaign trail by samuel rosenman, frances perkins, and james farley, all of whom would become important political associates.[115] while smith lost the presidency in a landslide, and was defeated in his home state, roosevelt was elected governor by a one-percent margin.[116] roosevelt's election as governor of the most populous state immediately made him a contender in the next presidential election.[117]
upon taking office in january 1929, roosevelt proposed the construction of a series of hydroelectric power plants and sought to address the ongoing farm crisis of the 1920s.[118] relations between roosevelt and smith suffered after roosevelt chose not to retain key smith appointees like robert moses.[119] roosevelt and eleanor established a political understanding that would last for the duration of his political career; she would dutifully serve as the governor's wife but would also be free to pursue her own agenda and interests.[120] he also began holding "fireside chats", in which he directly addressed his constituents via radio, often using these chats to pressure the new york state legislature to advance his agenda.[121] in october 1929, the wall street crash occurred, and the country began sliding into the great depression.[122] while president hoover and many state governors believed that the economic crisis would subside, roosevelt saw the seriousness of the situation and established a state employment commission. he also became the first governor to publicly endorse the idea of unemployment insurance.[123]
when roosevelt began his run for a second term in may 1930, he reiterated his doctrine from the campaign two years before: "that progressive government by its very terms, must be a living and growing thing, that the battle for it is never ending and that if we let up for one single moment or one single year, not merely do we stand still but we fall back in the march of civilization."[124] he ran on a platform that called for aid to farmers, full employment, unemployment insurance, and old-age pensions.[125] his republican opponent could not overcome the public's criticism of the republican party during the economic downturn, and roosevelt was elected to a second term by a 14% margin.[126] with the hoover administration resisting proposals to directly address the economic crisis, governor roosevelt proposed an economic relief package and the establishment of the temporary emergency relief administration to distribute those funds. led first by jesse i. straus and then by harry hopkins, the agency assisted well over one third of new york's population between 1932 and 1938.[127] roosevelt also began an investigation into allegations of public corruption in new york city among the judiciary, the police force, and organized crime, and became known as the seabury commission. many public officials were removed from office as a result.[128]
he opened the 1932 winter olympics in lake placid, became the first american to open the olympic games as a government official.

1932 presidential election
main article: united states presidential election, 1932
 roosevelt in 1933
as the 1932 presidential election approached, roosevelt increasingly turned his attention to national politics. he established a campaign team led by howe and farley and a "brain trust" of policy advisers.[129] with the economy ailing, many democrats hoped that the 1932 elections would result in the election of the first democratic president since woodrow wilson. roosevelt's re-election as governor had established him as the front-runner for the 1932 democratic presidential nomination. roosevelt rallied the progressive supporters of the wilson administration while also appealing to many conservatives, establishing himself as the leading candidate in the south and west. the chief opposition to roosevelt's candidacy came from northeastern conservatives such as al smith, the 1928 democratic presidential nominee. smith hoped to deny roosevelt the two-thirds support necessary to win the party's presidential nomination at the 1932 democratic national convention in chicago, and then emerge as the nominee after multiple rounds of balloting. roosevelt entered the convention with a delegate lead due to his success in the 1932 democratic primaries, but most delegates entered the convention unbound to any particular candidate. on the first presidential ballot of the convention, roosevelt received the votes of more than half but less than two-thirds of the delegates, with smith finishing in a distant second place. speaker of the house john nance garner, who controlled the votes of texas and california, threw his support behind roosevelt after the third ballot, and roosevelt clinched the nomination on the fourth ballot. with little input from roosevelt, garner won the vice presidential nomination. roosevelt flew in from new york after learning that he had won the nomination, becoming the first major party presidential nominee to accept the nomination in person.[130]

 1932 electoral vote results
in his acceptance speech, roosevelt declared, "i pledge you, i pledge myself to a new deal for the american people... this is more than a political campaign. it is a call to arms."[131] roosevelt promised securities regulation, tariff reduction, farm relief, government-funded public works, and other government actions to address the great depression.[132] reflecting changing public opinion, the democratic platform included a call for the repeal of prohibition; roosevelt himself had not taken a public stand on the issue prior to the convention but promised to uphold the party platform.[133] after the convention, roosevelt won endorsements from several progressive republicans, including george w. norris, hiram johnson, and robert la follette jr.[134] he also reconciled with the party's conservative wing, and even al smith was persuaded to support the democratic ticket.[135] hoover's handling of the bonus army further damaged the incumbent's popularity, as newspapers across the country criticized the use of force to disperse assembled veterans.[136]
roosevelt won 57% of the popular vote and carried all but six states. historians and political scientists consider the 1932–36 elections to be realigning elections. roosevelt's victory was enabled by the creation of the new deal coalition, small farmers, the southern whites, catholics, big city political machines, labor unions, northern african americans (southern ones were still disfranchised), jews, intellectuals, and political liberals.[137] the creation of the new deal coalition transformed american politics and started what political scientists call the "new deal party system" or the fifth party system.[138] between the civil war and 1929, democrats had rarely controlled both houses of congress and had won just four of seventeen presidential elections; from 1932 to 1979, democrats won eight of twelve presidential elections and generally controlled both houses of congress.[139]
roosevelt was elected in november 1932 but, like his predecessors, would not take office until the following march. after the election, hoover sought to convince roosevelt to renounce much of his campaign platform and to endorse the hoover administration's policies.[140] roosevelt refused hoover's request to develop a joint program to stop the downward economic spiral, claiming that it would tie his hands, and that hoover had all the power to act if necessary.[141] the economy spiraled downward until the banking system began a complete nationwide shutdown as hoover's term ended.[142] roosevelt used the transition period to select the personnel for his incoming administration, and he chose howe as his chief of staff, farley as postmaster general, and frances perkins as secretary of labor. william h. woodin, a republican industrialist close to roosevelt, was the choice for secretary of the treasury, while roosevelt chose senator cordell hull of tennessee as secretary of state. harold l. ickes and henry a. wallace, two progressive republicans, were selected for the roles of secretary of the interior and secretary of agriculture, respectively.[143] in february 1933, roosevelt escaped an assassination attempt by giuseppe zangara, who expressed a "hate for all rulers." attempting to shoot roosevelt, zangara instead mortally wounded chicago mayor anton cermak, who was sitting alongside roosevelt.[144][145]

presidency (1933–1945)
main article: presidency of franklin d. roosevelt
 outgoing president herbert hoover and roosevelt on inauguration day, 1933
roosevelt appointed powerful men to top positions but made all the major decisions, regardless of delays, inefficiency or resentment. analyzing the president's administrative style, historian james macgregor burns concludes:

.mw-parser-output .templatequote{overflow:hidden;margin:1em 0;padding:0 40px}.mw-parser-output .templatequote .templatequotecite{line-height:1.5em;text-align:left;padding-left:1.6em;margin-top:0}the president stayed in charge of his administration...by drawing fully on his formal and informal powers as chief executive; by raising goals, creating momentum, inspiring a personal loyalty, getting the best out of people...by deliberately fostering among his aides a sense of competition and a clash of wills that led to disarray, heartbreak, and anger but also set off pulses of executive energy and sparks of creativity...by handing out one job to several men and several jobs to one man, thus strengthening his own position as a court of appeals, as a depository of information, and as a tool of co-ordination; by ignoring or bypassing collective decision-making agencies, such as the cabinet...and always by persuading, flattering, juggling, improvising, reshuffling, harmonizing, conciliating, manipulating.[146]

first and second terms (1933–1941)
main article: first and second terms of the presidency of franklin d. roosevelt




nothing to fear

sample of the inaugural speech from fdr
problems playing this file? see media help.
when roosevelt was inaugurated on march 4, 1933, the u.s. was at the nadir of the worst depression in its history. a quarter of the workforce was unemployed. farmers were in deep trouble as prices had fallen by 60%. industrial production had fallen by more than half since 1929. two million people were homeless. by the evening of march 4, 32 of the 48 states – as well as the district of columbia – had closed their banks.[147]
historians categorized roosevelt's program as "relief, recovery and reform." relief was urgently needed by tens of millions of unemployed. recovery meant boosting the economy back to normal. reform meant long-term fixes of what was wrong, especially with the financial and banking systems. through roosevelt's series of radio talks, known as fireside chats, he presented his proposals directly to the american public.[148] energized by his personal victory over his paralytic illness, roosevelt relied on his persistent optimism and activism to renew the national spirit.[149]

first new deal (1933–1934)
the roosevelt cabinet[150]officenametermpresidentfranklin d. roosevelt1933–1945vice presidentjohn nance garner1933–1941henry agard wallace1941–1945harry s. truman1945secretary of statecordell hull1933–1944edward r. stettinius, jr.1944–1945secretary of treasurywilliam h. woodin1933–1934henry morgenthau, jr.1934–1945secretary of wargeorge h. dern1933–1936harry hines woodring1936–1940henry l. stimson1940–1945attorney generalhomer stille cummings1933–1939frank murphy1939–1940robert h. jackson1940–1941francis b. biddle1941–1945postmaster generaljames a. farley1933–1940frank comerford walker1940–1945secretary of the navyclaude a. swanson1933–1939charles edison1940frank knox1940–1944james v. forrestal1944–1945secretary of the interiorharold l. ickes1933–1945secretary of agriculturehenry a. wallace1933–1940claude r. wickard1940–1945secretary of commercedaniel c. roper1933–1938harry l. hopkins1939–1940jesse h. jones1940–1945henry a. wallace1945secretary of laborfrances c. perkins1933–1945
on his second day in office, roosevelt declared a "bank holiday" and called for a special session of congress to start march 9, on which date congress passed the emergency banking act.[151] the act, which was based on a plan developed by the hoover administration and wall street bankers, gave the president the power to determine the opening and closing of banks and authorized the federal reserve banks to issue bank notes.[152] the ensuing "first 100 days" of the 73rd united states congress saw an unprecedented amount of legislation[153] and set a benchmark against which future presidents would be compared.[154] when the banks reopened on monday, march 15, stock prices rose by 15 percent and bank deposits exceeded withdrawals, thus ending the bank panic.[155] on march 22, roosevelt signed the cullen–harrison act, which effectively ended federal prohibition.[156]
roosevelt presided over the establishment of several agencies and measures designed to provide relief for the unemployed and others in need. the federal emergency relief administration (fera), under the leadership of harry hopkins, was designed to distribute relief to state governments.[157] the public works administration (pwa), under the leadership of secretary of the interior harold ickes, was created to oversee the construction of large-scale public works such as dams, bridges, and schools.[157] the most popular of all new deal agencies – and roosevelt's favorite – was the civilian conservation corps (ccc), which hired 250,000 unemployed young men to work on local rural projects. roosevelt also expanded a hoover agency, the reconstruction finance corporation, making it a major source of financing for railroads and industry. congress gave the federal trade commission broad new regulatory powers and provided mortgage relief to millions of farmers and homeowners. roosevelt also made agricultural relief a high priority and set up the agricultural adjustment administration (aaa). the aaa tried to force higher prices for commodities by paying farmers to leave land uncultivated and to cut herds.[158]
reform of the economy was the goal of the national industrial recovery act (nira) of 1933. it sought to end cutthroat competition by forcing industries to establish rules of operation for all firms within specific industries, such as minimum prices, agreements not to compete, and production restrictions. industry leaders negotiated the rules which were approved by nira officials. industry needed to raise wages as a condition for approval. provisions encouraged unions and suspended antitrust laws. nira was found to be unconstitutional by unanimous decision of the supreme court in may 1935; roosevelt strongly protested the decision.[159] roosevelt reformed the financial regulatory structure of the nation with the glass–steagall act, creating the federal deposit insurance corporation (fdic) to underwrite savings deposits. the act also sought to curb speculation by limiting affiliations between commercial banks and securities firms.[160] in 1934, the securities and exchange commission was created to regulate the trading of securities, while the federal communications commission was established to regulate telecommunications.[161]
recovery was pursued through federal spending.[162] the nira included $3.3 billion (equivalent to $63.87 billion in 2018) of spending through the public works administration. roosevelt worked with senator norris to create the largest government-owned industrial enterprise in american history — the tennessee valley authority (tva) — which built dams and power stations, controlled floods, and modernized agriculture and home conditions in the poverty-stricken tennessee valley. executive order 6102 declared that all privately held gold of american citizens was to be sold to the u.s. treasury and the price raised from $20 to $35 per ounce. the goal was to counter the deflation which was paralyzing the economy.[163]
roosevelt tried to keep his campaign promise by cutting the federal budget — including a reduction in military spending from $752 million in 1932 to $531 million in 1934 and a 40% cut in spending on veterans benefits — by removing 500,000 veterans and widows from the pension rolls and reducing benefits for the remainder, as well as cutting the salaries of federal employees and reducing spending on research and education. but the veterans were well organized and strongly protested, and most benefits were restored or increased by 1934.[164] veterans groups such as the american legion and the veterans of foreign wars won their campaign to transform their benefits from payments due in 1945 to immediate cash when congress overrode the president's veto and passed the bonus act in january 1936.[165] it pumped sums equal to 2% of the gdp into the consumer economy and had a major stimulus effect.[166]

second new deal (1935–1936)
 roosevelt signs the social security act into law, august 14, 1935
roosevelt expected that his party would lose several races in the 1934 congressional elections, as the president's party had done in most previous midterm elections, but the democrats picked up seats in both houses of congress. empowered by the public's apparent vote of confidence in his administration, the first item on roosevelt's agenda in the 74th congress was the creation of a social insurance program.[167] the social security act established social security and promised economic security for the elderly, the poor and the sick. roosevelt insisted that it should be funded by payroll taxes rather than from the general fund, saying, "we put those payroll contributions there so as to give the contributors a legal, moral, and political right to collect their pensions and unemployment benefits. with those taxes in there, no damn politician can ever scrap my social security program."[168] compared with the social security systems in western european countries, the social security act of 1935 was rather conservative. but for the first time the federal government took responsibility for the economic security of the aged, the temporarily unemployed, dependent children, and the handicapped.[169] against roosevelt's original intention for universal coverage, the act only applied to roughly sixty percent of the labor force, as farmers, domestic workers, and other groups were excluded.[170]
roosevelt consolidated the various relief organizations, though some, like the pwa, continued to exist. after winning congressional authorization for further funding of relief efforts, roosevelt established the works progress administration (wpa). under the leadership of harry hopkins, the wpa employed over three million people in its first year of existence. the wpa undertook numerous construction projects and provided funding to the national youth administration and arts organizations.[171]

 1936 re-election handbill for roosevelt promoting his economic policy
senator robert wagner wrote the national labor relations act, which guaranteed workers the rights to collective bargaining through unions of their own choice. the act also established the national labor relations board (nlrb) to facilitate wage agreements and to suppress the repeated labor disturbances. the wagner act did not compel employers to reach agreement with their employees, but it opened possibilities for american labor.[172] the result was a tremendous growth of membership in the labor unions, especially in the mass-production sector.[173] when the flint sit-down strike threatened the production of general motors, roosevelt broke with the precedent set by many former presidents and refused to intervene; the strike ultimately led to the unionization of both general motors and its rivals in the american automobile industry.[174]
while the first new deal of 1933 had broad support from most sectors, the second new deal challenged the business community. conservative democrats, led by al smith, fought back with the american liberty league, savagely attacking roosevelt and equating him with karl marx and vladimir lenin.[175] but smith overplayed his hand, and his boisterous rhetoric let roosevelt isolate his opponents and identify them with the wealthy vested interests that opposed the new deal, strengthening roosevelt for the 1936 landslide.[175] by contrast, labor unions, energized by the wagner act, signed up millions of new members and became a major backer of roosevelt's reelections in 1936, 1940 and 1944.[176]
biographer james m. burns suggests that roosevelt's policy decisions were guided more by pragmatism than ideology, and that he "was like the general of a guerrilla army whose columns, fighting blindly in the mountains through dense ravines and thickets, suddenly converge, half by plan and half by coincidence, and debouch into the plain below."[177] roosevelt argued that such apparently haphazard methodology was necessary. "the country needs and, unless i mistake its temper, the country demands bold, persistent experimentation," he wrote. "it is common sense to take a method and try it; if it fails, admit it frankly and try another. but above all, try something."[178]

landslide re-election, 1936
main article: united states presidential election, 1936
 1936 electoral vote results
though 8 million workers remained unemployed in 1936, economic conditions had improved since 1932 and roosevelt was widely popular. an attempt by huey long and other individuals to organize a left-wing alternative to the democratic party collapsed after long's death in 1935.[179] roosevelt won re-nomination with little opposition at the 1936 democratic national convention, while his allies overcame southern resistance to permanently abolish the long-established rule that had required democratic presidential candidates to win the votes of two-thirds of the delegates rather than a simple majority.[d] the republicans nominated kansas governor alf landon, a well-respected but bland candidate whose chances were damaged by the public re-emergence of the still-unpopular herbert hoover.[181] while roosevelt campaigned on his new deal programs and continued to attack hoover, landon sought to win voters who approved of the goals of the new deal but disagreed with its implementation.[182]
in the 1936 presidential election against republican alf landon and a third party candidate, roosevelt won 60.8% of the vote and carried every state except maine and vermont.[183] the democratic ticket won the highest proportion of the popular vote.[e] democrats also expanded their majorities in congress, winning control of over three-quarters of the seats in each house. the election also saw the consolidation of the new deal coalition; while the democrats lost some of their traditional allies in big business, they were replaced by groups such as organized labor and african americans, the latter of whom voted democratic for the first time since the civil war.[184] roosevelt lost high income voters, especially businessmen and professionals, but made major gains among the poor and minorities. he won 86 percent of the jewish vote, 81 percent of catholics, 80 percent of union members, 76 percent of southerners, 76 percent of blacks in northern cities, and 75 percent of people on relief. roosevelt carried 102 of the nation's 106 cities with a population of 100,000 or more.[185]

supreme court fight and second term legislation
see also: franklin d. roosevelt supreme court candidates and hughes court
supreme court appointments by president franklin d. roosevelt[186]positionnametermchief justiceharlan fiske stone1941–1946associate justicehugo black1937–1971stanley forman reed1938–1957felix frankfurter1939–1962william o. douglas1939–1975frank murphy1940–1949james f. byrnes1941–1942robert h. jackson1941–1954wiley blount rutledge1943–1949
the supreme court became roosevelt's primary domestic focus during his second term after the court overturned many of his programs, including nira. the more conservative members of the court upheld the principles of the lochner era, which saw numerous economic regulations struck down on the basis of freedom of contract.[187] roosevelt proposed the judicial procedures reform bill of 1937, which would have allowed him to appoint an additional justice for each incumbent justice over the age of 70; in 1937, there were six supreme court justices over the age of 70. the size of the court had been set at nine since the passage of the judiciary act of 1869, and congress had altered the number of justices six other times throughout u.s. history.[188] roosevelt's "court packing" plan ran into intense political opposition from his own party, led by vice president garner, since it upset the separation of powers.[189] a bipartisan coalition of liberals and conservatives of both parties opposed the bill, and chief justice charles evans hughes broke with precedent by publicly advocating defeat of the bill. any chance of passing the bill ended with the death of senate majority leader joseph taylor robinson in july 1937.[190]
starting with the 1937 case of west coast hotel co. v. parrish, the court began to take a more favorable view of economic regulations. that same year, roosevelt appointed a supreme court justice for the first time, and by 1941, seven of the nine justices had been appointed by roosevelt.[f][191] after parish, the court shifted its focus from judicial review of economic regulations to the protection of civil liberties.[192] four of roosevelt's supreme court appointees, felix frankfurter, robert h. jackson,
hugo black, and william o. douglas, would be particularly influential in re-shaping the jurisprudence of the court.[193][194]
with roosevelt's influence on the wane following the failure of the judicial procedures reform bill of 1937, conservative democrats joined with republicans to block the implementation of further new deal programs.[195] roosevelt did manage to pass some legislation, including the housing act of 1937, a second agricultural adjustment act, and the fair labor standards act (flsa) of 1938, which was the last major piece of new deal legislation. the flsa outlawed child labor, established a federal minimum wage, and required overtime pay for certain employees who work in excess of forty-hours per week.[196] he also won passage of the reorganization act of 1939 and subsequently created the executive office of the president, making it "the nerve center of the federal administrative system."[197] when the economy began to deteriorate again in late 1937, roosevelt asked congress for $5 billion (equivalent to $87.14 billion in 2018) in relief and public works funding. this managed to eventually create as many as 3.3 million wpa jobs by 1938. projects accomplished under the wpa ranged from new federal courthouses and post offices, to facilities and infrastructure for national parks, bridges and other infrastructure across the country, and architectural surveys and archaeological excavations — investments to construct facilities and preserve important resources. beyond this, however, roosevelt recommended to a special congressional session only a permanent national farm act, administrative reorganization, and regional planning measures, all of which were leftovers from a regular session. according to burns, this attempt illustrated roosevelt's inability to decide on a basic economic program.[198]
determined to overcome the opposition of conservative democrats in congress, roosevelt became involved in the 1938 democratic primaries, actively campaigning for challengers who were more supportive of new deal reform. roosevelt failed badly, managing to defeat only one target, a conservative democrat from new york city.[199] in the november 1938 elections, democrats lost six senate seats and 71 house seats, with losses concentrated among pro-new deal democrats. when congress reconvened in 1939, republicans under senator robert taft formed a conservative coalition with southern democrats, virtually ending roosevelt's ability to enact his domestic proposals.[200] despite their opposition to roosevelt's domestic policies, many of these conservative congressmen would provide crucial support for roosevelt's foreign policy before and during world war ii.[201]

conservation and the environment
roosevelt had a lifelong interest in the environment and conservation starting with his youthful interest in forestry on his family estate. although roosevelt was never an outdoorsman or sportsman on theodore roosevelt's scale, his growth of the national systems were comparable.[5] roosevelt was active in expanding, funding, and promoting the national park and national forest systems.[202] under roosevelt, their popularity soared, from three million visitors a year at the start of the decade to 15.5 million in 1939.[203] the civilian conservation corps enrolled 3.4 million young men and built 13,000 miles of trails, planted two billion trees, and upgraded 125,000 miles of dirt roads. every state had its own state parks, and roosevelt made sure that wpa and ccc projects were set up to upgrade them as well as the national systems.[204][205]

gnp and unemployment rates
see also: great depression in the united states § roosevelt's new deal


unemployment rates[g]


year
lebergott
darby


1929
3.2
3.2


1932
23.6
22.9


1933
24.9
20.6


1934
21.7
16.0


1935
20.1
14.2


1936
16.9
9.9


1937
14.3
9.1


1938
19.0
12.5


1939
17.2
11.3


1940
14.6
9.5

government spending increased from 8.0% of gross national product (gnp) under hoover in 1932 to 10.2% of the gnp in 1936. the national debt as a percentage of the gnp had more than doubled under hoover from 16% to 40% of the gnp in early 1933. it held steady at close to 40% as late as fall 1941, then grew rapidly during the war.[207] the gnp was 34% higher in 1936 than in 1932 and 58% higher in 1940 on the eve of war. that is, the economy grew 58% from 1932 to 1940 in 8 years of peacetime, and then grew 56% from 1940 to 1945 in 5 years of wartime.[207] unemployment fell dramatically during roosevelt's first term. it increased in 1938 ("a depression within a depression") but continually declined after 1938.[206] total employment during roosevelt's term expanded by 18.31 million jobs, with an average annual increase in jobs during his administration of 5.3%.[208][209]

foreign policy (1933–1941)
 roosevelt with brazilian president getúlio vargas and other dignitaries in brazil, 1936
the main foreign policy initiative of roosevelt's first term was the good neighbor policy, which was a re-evaluation of u.s. policy towards latin america. the united states had frequently intervened in latin america following the promulgation of the monroe doctrine in 1823, and the united states had occupied several latin american nations in the banana wars that had occurred following the spanish–american war of 1898. after roosevelt took office, he withdrew u.s. forces from haiti and reached new treaties with cuba and panama, ended their status as u.s. protectorates. in december 1933, roosevelt signed the montevideo convention on the rights and duties of states, renouncing the right to intervene unilaterally in the affairs of latin american countries.[210] roosevelt also normalized relations with the soviet union, which the united states had refused to recognize since the 1920s.[211] roosevelt hoped to renegotiate the russian debt from world war i and open trade relations, but no progress was made on either issue, and "both nations were soon disillusioned by the accord."[212]
the rejection of the treaty of versailles during the wilson administration marked the dominance of isolationism in american foreign policy. despite roosevelt's wilsonian background, he and secretary of state cordell hull acted with great care not to provoke isolationist sentiment. the isolationist movement was bolstered in the early to mid-1930s by senator gerald nye and others who succeeded in their effort to stop the "merchants of death" in the u.s. from selling arms abroad.[213] this effort took the form of the neutrality acts; the president asked for, but was refused, a provision to give him the discretion to allow the sale of arms to victims of aggression.[214] focused on domestic policy, roosevelt largely acquiesced to congress's non-interventionist policies in the early-to-mid 1930s.[215] in the interim, fascist italy under benito mussolini proceeded to overcome ethiopia, and the italians joined nazi germany under adolf hitler in supporting general francisco franco and the nationalist cause in the spanish civil war.[216] as that conflict drew to a close in early 1939, roosevelt expressed regret in not aiding the spanish republicans.[217] when japan invaded china in 1937, isolationism limited roosevelt's ability to aid china,[218] despite atrocities like the nanking massacre and the uss panay incident.[219]

 the roosevelts with king george vi and queen elizabeth, sailing from washington, d.c., to mount vernon, virginia on the uss potomac during the first u.s. visit of a reigning british monarch (june 9, 1939)
 foreign trips of roosevelt during his presidency[220]
germany annexed austria in 1938, and soon turned its attention to its eastern neighbors.[221] roosevelt made it clear that, in the event of german aggression against czechoslovakia, the u.s. would remain neutral.[222] after completion of the munich agreement and the execution of kristallnacht, american public opinion turned against germany, and roosevelt began preparing for a possible war with germany.[223] relying on an interventionist political coalition of southern democrats and business-oriented republicans, roosevelt oversaw the expansion u.s. airpower and war production capacity.[224]
when world war ii began in september 1939 with germany's invasion of poland and britain and france's subsequent declaration of war upon germany, roosevelt sought ways to assist britain and france militarily.[225] isolationist leaders like charles lindbergh and senator william borah successfully mobilized opposition to roosevelt's proposed repeal of the neutrality act, but roosevelt won congressional approval of the sale of arms on a cash-and-carry basis.[226] he also began a regular secret correspondence with britain's first lord of the admiralty, winston churchill, in september 1939 — the first of 1,700 letters and telegrams between them.[227] roosevelt forged a close personal relationship with churchill, who became prime minister of the united kingdom in may 1940.[228]
the fall of france in june 1940 shocked the american public, and isolationist sentiment declined.[229] in july 1940, roosevelt appointed two interventionist republican leaders, henry l. stimson and frank knox, as secretaries of war and the navy, respectively. both parties gave support to his plans for a rapid build-up of the american military, but the isolationists warned that roosevelt would get the nation into an unnecessary war with germany.[230] in july 1940, a group of congressmen introduced a bill that would authorize the nation's first peacetime draft, and with the support of the roosevelt administration the selective training and service act of 1940 passed in september. the size of the army would increase from 189,000 men at the end of 1939 to 1.4 million men in mid-1941.[231] in september 1940, roosevelt openly defied the neutrality acts by reaching the destroyers for bases agreement, which, in exchange for military base rights in the british caribbean islands, gave 50 wwi american destroyers to britain.[232]

election of 1940: breaking with tradition
main article: united states presidential election, 1940
in the months prior to the july 1940 democratic national convention, there was much speculation as to whether roosevelt would run for an unprecedented third term. the two-term tradition, although not yet enshrined in the constitution,[h] had been established by george washington when he refused to run for a third term in the 1796 presidential election. roosevelt refused to give a definitive statement as to his willingness to be a candidate again, and he even indicated to some ambitious democrats, such as james farley, that he would not run for a third term and that they could seek the democratic nomination. however, as germany swept through western europe and menaced britain in mid-1940, roosevelt decided that only he had the necessary experience and skills to see the nation safely through the nazi threat. he was aided by the party's political bosses, who feared that no democrat except roosevelt could defeat wendell willkie, the popular republican nominee.[233]

 1940 electoral vote results
at the july 1940 democratic convention in chicago, roosevelt easily swept aside challenges from farley and vice president garner, who had turned against roosevelt in his second term because of his liberal economic and social policies.[234] to replace garner on the ticket, roosevelt turned to secretary of agriculture henry wallace of iowa, a former republican who strongly supported the new deal and was popular in farm states.[235] the choice was strenuously opposed by many of the party's conservatives, who felt wallace was too radical and "eccentric" in his private life to be an effective running mate. but roosevelt insisted that without wallace on the ticket he would decline re-nomination, and wallace won the vice-presidential nomination, defeating speaker of the house william b. bankhead and other candidates.[234]
a late august poll taken by gallup found the race to be essentially tied, but roosevelt's popularity surged in september following the announcement of the destroyers for bases agreement.[236] willkie supported much of the new deal as well as rearmament and aid to britain, but warned that roosevelt would drag the country into another european war.[237] responding to willkie's attacks, roosevelt promised to keep the country out of the war.[238] roosevelt won the 1940 election with 55% of the popular vote, 38 of the 48 states, and almost 85% of the electoral vote.[239]

third and fourth terms (1941–1945)
main article: third and fourth terms of the presidency of franklin d. roosevelt
lead-up to the war




state of the union (four freedoms) (january 6, 1941)

franklin delano roosevelt's january 6, 1941 state of the union address introducing the theme of the four freedoms (starting at 32:02)
problems playing this file? see media help.
roosevelt's third term was dominated by world war ii. by 1940, re-armament was in high gear, partly to expand and re-equip the army and navy and partly to become the "arsenal of democracy" for britain and other countries.[240] with his famous four freedoms speech in january 1941, roosevelt laid out the case for an american defense of basic rights throughout the world.[241] assisted by willkie, roosevelt won congressional approval of the lend-lease program, which directed massive military and economic aid to britain and china.[242] in sharp contrast to the loans of world war i, there would be no repayment after the war.[243] as roosevelt took a firmer stance against japan, germany, and italy, american isolationists such as charles lindbergh and the america first committee vehemently attacked roosevelt as an irresponsible warmonger.[244] when germany invaded the soviet union in june 1941, roosevelt agreed to extend lend-lease to the soviets. thus, roosevelt had committed the u.s. to the allied side with a policy of "all aid short of war."[245]
by july 1941, president franklin delano roosevelt authorized the creation of the office of the coordinator of inter-american affairs (ociaa) in response to perceived propaganda efforts in latin america by germany and italy. through the use of news, film and radio broadcast media in the united states, roosevelt sought to enhance his good neighbor policy, promote pan-americanism and forestall military hostility in latin america through the use of cultural diplomacy.[246][247][248][249][250][251]
in august 1941, roosevelt and churchill conducted a highly secret bilateral meeting in which they drafted the atlantic charter, conceptually outlining global wartime and postwar goals. this would be the first of several wartime conferences;[252] churchill and roosevelt would meet ten more times in person.[253] though churchill pressed for an american declaration of war against germany, roosevelt believed that congress would reject any attempt to bring the united states into the war.[254] in september, a german submarine fired on the u.s. destroyer greer, and roosevelt declared that the u.s. navy would assume an escort role for allied convoys in the atlantic as far east as great britain and would fire upon german ships or submarines (u-boats) of the kriegsmarine if they entered the u.s. navy zone. this "shoot on sight" policy effectively declared naval war on germany and was favored by americans by a margin of 2-to-1.[255]

pearl harbor and declarations of war
see also: events leading to the attack on pearl harbor
 roosevelt and winston churchill aboard hms prince of wales for 1941 atlantic charter meeting
after the german invasion of poland, the primary concern of both roosevelt and his top military staff was on the war in europe, but japan also presented foreign policy challenges. relations with japan had continually deteriorated since its invasion of manchuria in 1931, and they had further worsened with roosevelt's support of china.[256] with the war in europe occupying the attention of the major colonial powers, japanese leaders eyed vulnerable colonies such as the dutch east indies, french indochina, and british malaya.[257] after roosevelt announced a $100 million loan (equivalent to $1.8 billion in 2018) to china in reaction to japan's occupation of northern french indochina, japan signed the tripartite pact with germany and italy. the pact bound each country to defend the others against attack, and germany, japan, and italy became known as the axis powers.[258] overcoming those who favored invading the soviet union, the japanese army high command successfully advocated for the conquest of southeast asia to ensure continued access to raw materials.[259] in july 1941, after japan occupied the remainder of french indochina, roosevelt cut off the sale of oil to japan, depriving japan of more than 95 percent of its oil supply.[260] he also placed the philippine military under american command and reinstated general douglas macarthur into active duty to command u.s. forces in the philippines.[261]

roosevelt signing declaration of war against japan (left) on december 8 and against germany (right) on december 11, 1941
the japanese were incensed by the embargo and japanese leaders became determined to attack the united states unless it lifted the embargo. the roosevelt administration was unwilling to reverse policy, and secretary of state hull blocked a potential summit between roosevelt and prime minister fumimaro konoe.[i] after diplomatic efforts to end the embargo failed, the privy council of japan authorized a strike against the united states.[263] the japanese believed that the destruction of the united states asiatic fleet (stationed in the philippines) and the united states pacific fleet (stationed at pearl harbor in hawaii) was vital to the conquest of southeast asia.[264] on the morning of december 7, 1941, the japanese struck the u.s. naval base at pearl harbor with a surprise attack, knocking out the main american battleship fleet and killing 2,403 american servicemen and civilians. at the same time, separate japanese task forces attacked thailand, british hong kong, the philippines, and other targets. roosevelt called for war in his famous "infamy speech" to congress, in which he said: "yesterday, december 7, 1941 — a date which will live in infamy — the united states of america was suddenly and deliberately attacked by naval and air forces of the empire of japan." in a nearly unanimous vote, congress declared war on japan.[265] after the japanese attack at pearl harbor, antiwar sentiment in the united states largely evaporated overnight. on december 11, 1941, hitler and mussolini declared war on the united states, which responded in kind.[j][266]
a majority of scholars have rejected the conspiracy theories that roosevelt, or any other high government officials, knew in advance about the japanese attack on pearl harbor.[267] the japanese had kept their secrets closely guarded. senior american officials were aware that war was imminent, but they did not expect an attack on pearl harbor.[268] roosevelt had expected that the japanese would attack either the dutch east indies or thailand.[269]

war plans
 territory controlled by the allies (blue and red) and the axis powers (black) in june 1942
in late december 1941 churchill and roosevelt met at the arcadia conference, which established a joint strategy between the u.s. and britain.
both agreed on a europe first strategy that prioritized the defeat of germany before japan. the u.s. and britain established the combined chiefs of staff to coordinate military policy and the combined munitions assignments board to coordinate the allocation of supplies.[270] an agreement was also reached to establish a centralized command in the pacific theater called abda, named for the american, british, dutch, and australian forces in the theater.[271] on january 1, 1942, the united states, britain, china, the soviet union, and twenty-two other countries (the allied powers) issued the declaration by united nations, in which each nation pledged to defeat the axis powers.[272]
in 1942, roosevelt formed a new body, the joint chiefs of staff, which made the final decisions on american military strategy. admiral ernest j. king as chief of naval operations commanded the navy and marines, while general george c. marshall led the army and was in nominal control of the air force, which in practice was commanded by general hap arnold.[273] the joint chiefs were chaired by admiral william d. leahy, the most senior officer in the military.[274] roosevelt avoided micromanaging the war and let his top military officers make most decisions.[275] roosevelt's civilian appointees handled the draft and procurement of men and equipment, but no civilians – not even the secretaries of war or navy – had a voice in strategy. roosevelt avoided the state department and conducted high level diplomacy through his aides, especially harry hopkins, whose influence was bolstered by his control of the lend lease funds.[276]

nuclear program
see also: history of nuclear weapons and nuclear weapons of the united states
in august 1939, leo szilard and albert einstein sent the einstein–szilárd letter to roosevelt, warning of the possibility of a german project to develop nuclear weapons. szilard realized that the recently discovered process of nuclear fission could be used to create a nuclear chain reaction that could be used as a weapon of mass destruction.[277] roosevelt feared the consequences of allowing germany to have sole possession of the technology, and authorized preliminary research into nuclear weapons.[k] after the attack on pearl harbor, the roosevelt administration secured the funds needed to continue research and selected general leslie groves to oversee the manhattan project, which was charged with developing the first nuclear weapons. roosevelt and churchill agreed to jointly pursue the project, and roosevelt helped ensure that american scientists cooperated with their british counterparts.[279]

wartime conferences
see also: diplomatic history of world war ii
chiang kai-shek, roosevelt, and winston churchill at the cairo conferencechurchill, roosevelt, and stalin at the yalta conference, february 1945
roosevelt coined the term "four policemen" to refer the "big four" allied powers of world war ii, the united states, the united kingdom, the soviet union and china. the "big three" of roosevelt, churchill, and soviet leader joseph stalin, together with chinese generalissimo chiang kai-shek, cooperated informally on a plan in which american and british troops concentrated in the west; soviet troops fought on the eastern front; and chinese, british and american troops fought in asia and the pacific. the united states also continued to send aid via the lend-lease program to the soviet union and other countries. the allies formulated strategy in a series of high-profile conferences as well as by contact through diplomatic and military channels.[280] beginning in may 1942, the soviets urged an anglo-american invasion of german-occupied france in order to divert troops from the eastern front.[281] concerned that their forces were not yet ready for an invasion of france, churchill and roosevelt decided to delay such an invasion until at least 1943 and instead focus on a landing in north africa, known as operation torch.[282]
in november 1943, roosevelt, churchill, and stalin met to discuss strategy and post-war plans at the tehran conference, where roosevelt met stalin for the first time.[283] at the conference, britain and the united states committed to opening a second front against germany in 1944, while stalin committed to entering the war against japan at an unspecified date. subsequent conferences at bretton woods and dumbarton oaks established the framework for the post-war international monetary system and the united nations, an intergovernmental organization similar to wilson's failed league of nations.[284]
roosevelt, churchill, and stalin met for a second time at the february 1945 yalta conference in crimea. with the end of the war in europe approaching, roosevelt's primary focus was on convincing stalin to enter the war against japan; the joint chiefs had estimated that an american invasion of japan would cause as many as one million american casualties. in return for the soviet union's entrance into the war against japan, the soviet union was promised control of asian territories such as sakhalin island. the three leaders agreed to hold a conference in 1945 to establish the united nations, and they also agreed on the structure of the united nations security council, which would be charged with ensuring international peace and security. roosevelt did not push for the immediate evacuation of soviet soldiers from poland, but he won the issuance of the declaration on liberated europe, which promised free elections in countries that had been occupied by germany. germany itself would not be dismembered, but would be jointly occupied by the united states, france, britain, and the soviet union.[285] against soviet pressure, roosevelt and churchill refused to consent to imposing huge reparations and deindustrialization on germany after the war.[286] roosevelt's role in the yalta conference has been controversial; critics charge that he naively trusted the soviet union to allow free elections in eastern europe, while supporters argue that there was little more that roosevelt could have done for the eastern european countries given the soviet occupation and the need for cooperation with the soviet union during and after the war.[287][288]

course of the war
see also: military history of the united states during world war ii
the allies invaded french north africa in november 1942, securing the surrender of vichy french forces within days of landing.[289] at the january 1943 casablanca conference, the allies agreed to defeat axis forces in north africa and then launch an invasion of sicily, with an attack on france to take place in 1944. at the conference, roosevelt also announced that he would only accept the unconditional surrender of germany, japan, and italy.[290] in february 1943, the soviet union won a major victory at the battle of stalingrad, and in may 1943, the allies secured the surrender of over 250,000 german and italian soldiers in north africa, ending the north african campaign.[291] the allies launched an invasion of sicily in july 1943, capturing the island by the end of the following month.[292] in september 1943, the allies secured an armistice from italian prime minister pietro badoglio, but germany quickly restored mussolini to power.[292] the allied invasion of mainland italy commenced in september 1943, but the italian campaign continued until 1945 as german and italian troops resisted the allied advance.[293]

 the allies (blue and red) and the axis powers (black) in december 1944
to command the invasion of france, roosevelt chose general dwight d. eisenhower, who had successfully commanded a multinational coalition in north africa and sicily.[294] eisenhower chose to launch operation overlord on june 6, 1944. supported by 12,000 aircraft and the largest naval force ever assembled, the allies successfully established a beachhead in normandy and then advanced further into france.[275] though reluctant to back an unelected government, roosevelt recognized charles de gaulle's provisional government of the french republic as the de facto government of france in july 1944. after most of france had been liberated from german occupation, roosevelt granted formal recognition to de gaulle's government in october 1944.[295] over the following months, the allies liberated more territory from nazi occupation and began the invasion of germany. by april 1945, nazi resistance was crumbling in the face of advances by both the western allies and the soviet union.[296]
in the opening weeks of the war, japan conquered the philippines and the british and dutch colonies in southeast asia. the japanese advance reached its maximum extent by june 1942, when the u.s. navy scored a decisive victory at the battle of midway. american and australian forces then began a slow and costly strategy called island hopping or leapfrogging through the pacific islands, with the objective of gaining bases from which strategic airpower could be brought to bear on japan and from which japan could ultimately be invaded. in contrast to hitler, roosevelt took no direct part in the tactical naval operations, though he approved strategic decisions.[297] roosevelt gave way in part to insistent demands from the public and congress that more effort be devoted against japan, but he always insisted on germany first. the strength of the japanese navy was decimated in the battle of leyte gulf, and by april 1945 the allies had re-captured much of their lost territory in the pacific.[298]

home front
main article: united states home front during world war ii
the home front was subject to dynamic social changes throughout the war, though domestic issues were no longer roosevelt's most urgent policy concern. the military buildup spurred economic growth. unemployment fell in half from 7.7 million in spring 1940 to 3.4 million in fall 1941 and fell in half again to 1.5 million in fall 1942, out of a labor force of 54 million.[l] there was a growing labor shortage, accelerating the second wave of the great migration of african americans, farmers and rural populations to manufacturing centers. african americans from the south went to california and other west coast states for new jobs in the defense industry. to pay for increased government spending, in 1941 roosevelt proposed that congress enact an income tax rate of 99.5% on all income over $100,000; when the proposal failed, he issued an executive order imposing an income tax of 100% on income over $25,000, which congress rescinded.[300] the revenue act of 1942 instituted top tax rates as high as 94% (after accounting for the excess profits tax), greatly increased the tax base, and instituted the first federal withholding tax.[301] in 1944, roosevelt requested that congress enact legislation which would tax all "unreasonable" profits, both corporate and individual, and thereby support his declared need for over $10 billion in revenue for the war and other government measures. congress overrode roosevelt's veto to pass a smaller revenue bill raising $2 billion.[302]
in 1942, with the united states now in the conflict, war production increased dramatically, but fell short of the goals established by the president, due in part to manpower shortages.[303] the effort was also hindered by numerous strikes, especially among union workers in the coal mining and railroad industries, which lasted well into 1944.[304][305] nonetheless, between 1941 and 1945, the united states produced 2.4 million trucks, 300,000 military aircraft, 88,400 tanks, and 40 billion rounds of ammunition. the production capacity of the united states dwarfed that of other countries; for example, in 1944, the united states produced more military aircraft than the combined production of germany, japan, britain, and the soviet union.[306] the white house became the ultimate site for labor mediation, conciliation or arbitration. one particular battle royale occurred between vice president wallace, who headed the board of economic warfare, and jesse h. jones, in charge of the reconstruction finance corporation; both agencies assumed responsibility for acquisition of rubber supplies and came to loggerheads over funding. roosevelt resolved the dispute by dissolving both agencies.[307] in 1943, roosevelt established the office of war mobilization to oversee the home front; the agency was led by james f. byrnes, who came to be known as the "assistant president" due to his influence.[292]

play media roosevelt announced the plan for a bill of social and economic rights in the state of the union address broadcast on january 11, 1944. (excerpt)
roosevelt's 1944 state of the union address advocated that americans should think of basic economic rights as a second bill of rights.[308] he stated that all americans should have the right to "adequate medical care", "a good education", "a decent home", and a "useful and remunerative job".[309] in the most ambitious domestic proposal of his third term, roosevelt proposed the g.i. bill, which would create a massive benefits program for returning soldiers. benefits included post-secondary education, medical care, unemployment insurance, job counseling, and low-cost loans for homes and businesses. the g.i. bill passed unanimously in both houses of congress and was signed into law in june 1944. of the fifteen million americans who served in world war ii, more than half benefitted from the educational opportunities provided for in the g.i. bill.[310]

declining health
roosevelt, a chain-smoker throughout his entire adult life,[311][312] had been in declining physical health since at least 1940. in march 1944, shortly after his 62nd birthday, he underwent testing at bethesda hospital and was found to have high blood pressure, atherosclerosis, coronary artery disease causing angina pectoris, and congestive heart failure.[313][314][315]
hospital physicians and two outside specialists ordered roosevelt to rest. his personal physician, admiral ross mcintire, created a daily schedule that banned business guests for lunch and incorporated two hours of rest each day. during the 1944 re-election campaign, mcintire denied several times that roosevelt's health was poor; on october 12, for example, he announced that "the president's health is perfectly ok. there are absolutely no organic difficulties at all."[316] roosevelt realized that his declining health could eventually make it impossible for him to continue as president, and in 1945 he told a confidant that he might resign from the presidency following the end of the war.[317]

election of 1944
main articles: united states presidential election, 1944 and democratic party vice presidential candidate selection, 1944
 1944 electoral vote results
while some democrats had opposed roosevelt's nomination in 1940, the president faced little difficulty in securing his re-nomination at the 1944 democratic national convention. roosevelt made it clear before the convention that he was seeking another term, and on the lone presidential ballot of the convention roosevelt won the vast majority of delegates, although a minority of southern democrats voted for harry f. byrd. party leaders prevailed upon roosevelt to drop vice president wallace from the ticket, believing him to be an electoral liability and a poor potential successor in case of roosevelt's death. roosevelt preferred byrnes as wallace's replacement but was convinced to support senator harry s. truman of missouri, who had earned renown for his investigation of war production inefficiency and was acceptable to the various factions of the party. on the second vice presidential ballot of the convention, truman defeated wallace to win the nomination.[318]
the republicans nominated thomas e. dewey, the governor of new york, who had a reputation as a liberal in his party. the opposition lambasted roosevelt and his administration for domestic corruption, bureaucratic inefficiency, tolerance of communism, and military blunders. labor unions, which had grown rapidly in the war, fully supported roosevelt. roosevelt and truman won the 1944 election by a comfortable margin, defeating dewey and his running mate john w. bricker with 53.4% of the popular vote and 432 out of the 531 electoral votes.[319] the president campaigned in favor of a strong united nations, so his victory symbolized support for the nation's future participation in the international community.[320]

final months, death and aftermath (1945)


last photograph of roosevelt, taken april 11, 1945, the day before his deathroosevelt's funeral procession in washington, d.c., watched by 300,000 spectators (april 14, 1945)
when roosevelt returned to the united states from the yalta conference, many were shocked to see how old, thin and frail he looked. he spoke while seated in the well of the house, an unprecedented concession to his physical incapacity.[321] during march 1945, he sent strongly worded messages to stalin accusing him of breaking his yalta commitments over poland, germany, prisoners of war and other issues. when stalin accused the western allies of plotting behind his back a separate peace with hitler, roosevelt replied: "i cannot avoid a feeling of bitter resentment towards your informers, whoever they are, for such vile misrepresentations of my actions or those of my trusted subordinates."[322]
on march 29, 1945, roosevelt went to the little white house at warm springs, georgia, to rest before his anticipated appearance at the founding conference of the united nations. on the afternoon of april 12, roosevelt said, "i have a terrific headache."[323] he then slumped forward in his chair, unconscious, and was carried into his bedroom. the president's attending cardiologist, dr. howard bruenn, diagnosed the medical emergency as a massive cerebral hemorrhage.[324] at 3:35 p.m. that day, roosevelt died at the age of 63.
on the morning of april 13, roosevelt's body was placed in a flag-draped coffin and loaded onto the presidential train for the trip back to washington. along the route, thousands flocked to the tracks to pay their respects. after a white house funeral on april 14, roosevelt was transported by train from washington, d.c., to his place of birth at hyde park. as was his wish, roosevelt was buried on april 15 in the rose garden of his springwood estate.[325]
roosevelt's declining physical health had been kept secret from the general public. his death was met with shock and grief across the u.s. and around the world.[326] after germany surrendered the following month, newly-sworn in president truman dedicated victory in europe day and its celebrations to roosevelt's memory, and kept the flags across the u.s. at half-staff for the remainder of the 30-day mourning period, saying that his only wish was "that franklin d. roosevelt had lived to witness this day".[327] world war ii finally ended with the surrender of japan in september following the atomic bombings of hiroshima and nagasaki and the soviet entry into the war. truman would preside over the demobilization of the war effort and the establishment of the united nations and other postwar institutions envisioned during roosevelt's presidency.[328]

civil rights, internment, and the holocaust
further information: franklin d. roosevelt's record on civil rights
roosevelt was viewed as a hero by many african americans, catholics, and jews, and he was highly successful in attracting large majorities of these voters into his new deal coalition.[329] he won strong support from chinese americans and filipino americans, but not japanese americans, as he presided over their internment in concentration camps during the war.[330] african americans and native americans fared well in two new deal relief programs, the civilian conservation corps and the indian reorganization act, respectively. sitkoff reports that the wpa "provided an economic floor for the whole black community in the 1930s, rivaling both agriculture and domestic service as the chief source" of income.[331]

 eleanor roosevelt and mary mcleod bethune, a member of roosevelt's black cabinet (a key advisory group on race relations)
roosevelt did not join naacp leaders in pushing for federal anti-lynching legislation, as he believed that such legislation was unlikely to pass and that his support for it would alienate southern congressmen. he did, however, appoint a "black cabinet" of african american advisers to advise on race relations and african american issues, and he publicly denounced lynching as "murder."[332] first lady eleanor roosevelt vocally supported efforts designed to aid the african american community, including the fair labor standards act, which helped boost wages for nonwhite workers in the south.[333] in 1941, roosevelt established the fair employment practices committee (fepc) to implement executive order 8802, which prohibited racial and religious discrimination in employment among defense contractors. the fepc was the first national program directed against employment discrimination, and it played a major role in opening up new employment opportunities to non-white workers. during world war ii, the proportion of african american men employed in manufacturing positions rose significantly.[334] in response to roosevelt's policies, african americans increasingly defected from the republican party during the 1930s and 1940s, becoming an important democratic voting bloc in several northern states.[332]
the attack on pearl harbor raised concerns in the public regarding the possibility of sabotage by japanese americans. this suspicion was fed by long-standing racism against japanese immigrants, as well as the findings of the roberts commission, which concluded that the attack on pearl harbor had been assisted by japanese spies. on february 19, 1942, president roosevelt signed executive order 9066, which relocated hundreds of thousands of the japanese-american citizens and immigrants. they were forced to liquidate their properties and businesses and interned in hastily built camps in interior, harsh locations. distracted by other issues, roosevelt had delegated the decision for internment to secretary of war stimson, who in turn relied on the judgment of assistant secretary of war john j. mccloy. the supreme court upheld the constitutionality of the executive order in the 1944 case of korematsu v. united states.[335] many german and italian citizens were also arrested or placed into internment camps.[336]
after kristallnacht in 1938, roosevelt helped expedite jewish immigration from germany and allowed austrian and german citizens already in the united states to stay indefinitely. he was prevented from accepting more jewish immigrants by the restrictive immigration act of 1924, the prevalence of nativism and antisemitism among voters and members of congress, and some resistance in the american jewish community to the acceptance of eastern european jewish immigrants.[337] hitler chose to implement the "final solution"—the extermination of the european jewish population—by january 1942, and american officials learned of the scale of the nazi extermination campaign in the following months. against the objections of the state department, roosevelt convinced the other allied leaders to jointly issue the joint declaration by members of the united nations, which condemned the ongoing holocaust and promised to try its perpetrators as war criminals. in january 1944, roosevelt established the war refugee board to aid jews and other victims of axis atrocities. aside from these actions, roosevelt believed that the best way to help the persecuted populations of europe was to end the war as quickly as possible. top military leaders and war department leaders rejected any campaign to bomb the extermination camps or the rail lines leading to the camps, fearing it would be a diversion from the war effort. according to biographer jean edward smith, there is no evidence that anyone ever proposed such a campaign to roosevelt.[338]

legacy
historical reputation
fdr memorial in grosvenor square, london (1948)the four freedoms engraved on a wall at the franklin delano roosevelt memorial in washington, d.c. (1997)u.s. dime (1989) with a portrait of roosevelt; popularly known as the roosevelt dime
roosevelt is widely considered to be one of the most important figures in the history of the united states,[339] as well as one of the most influential figures of the 20th century.[340] historians and political scientists consistently rank roosevelt, george washington, and abraham lincoln as the three greatest presidents.[341][342][343][344] reflecting on roosevelt's presidency, "which brought the united states through the great depression and world war ii to a prosperous future", said fdr biographer jean edward smith in 2007, "he lifted himself from a wheelchair to lift the nation from its knees."[345]
the rapid expansion of government programs that occurred during roosevelt's term redefined the role of the government in the united states, and roosevelt's advocacy of government social programs was instrumental in redefining liberalism for coming generations.[346] roosevelt firmly established the united states' leadership role on the world stage, with his role in shaping and financing world war ii. his isolationist critics faded away, and even the republicans joined in his overall policies.[347] he also created a new understanding of the presidency, permanently increasing the power of the president at the expense of congress.[348]
his second bill of rights became, according to historian joshua zeitz, "the basis of the democratic party’s aspirations for the better part of four decades."[309] after his death, his widow, eleanor, continued to be a forceful presence in u.s. and world politics, serving as delegate to the conference which established the united nations and championing civil rights and liberalism generally. many members of his administration played leading roles in the administrations of truman, kennedy and johnson, each of whom embraced roosevelt's political legacy.[349]
during his presidency, and continuing to a lesser extent afterwards, there has been much criticism of roosevelt, some of it intense. critics have questioned not only his policies, positions, and the consolidation of power that occurred due to his responses to the crises of the depression and world war ii, but also his breaking with tradition by running for a third term as president.[350] long after his death, new lines of attack criticized roosevelt's policies regarding helping the jews of europe,[351] incarcerating the japanese on the west coast,[352] and opposing anti-lynching legislation.[353]

memorials
main article: list of memorials to franklin d. roosevelt
roosevelt's home in hyde park is now a national historic site and home to his presidential library. washington d.c., hosts two memorials to the former president. the largest, the 7.50-acre roosevelt memorial, is located next to the jefferson memorial on the tidal basin.[354] a much more modest memorial, a block of marble in front of the national archives building, was erected in 1965.[355] roosevelt's leadership in the march of dimes is one reason he is commemorated on the american dime.[356] roosevelt has also appeared on several u.s. postage stamps.

see also


franklin d. roosevelt portal

august adolph gennerich, his bodyguard
cultural depictions of franklin d. roosevelt
fdr's limousine
list of freemasons
list of allied world war ii conferences
roosevelt lrt station, one of the stations on the manila light rail transit system line 1



play media collection of video clips of roosevelt








fdr pearl harbor speech

speech given before joint session of congress in entirety. (3.1 mb, ogg/vorbis format).
"a date which will live in infamy"

section of pearl harbor speech with famous phrase. (168 kb, ogg/vorbis format).
problems playing these files? see media help.



notes


^ it was common for boys to wear what was considered "gender-neutral" clothing, thus boys wore dresses up until they were 6 or 7.[7]

^ in 2008, columbia awarded roosevelt with a posthumous juris doctor degree.[26]

^  state legislatures elected united states senators prior to the ratification of the seventeenth amendment in 1913.

^ biographer jean edward smith notes that "the significance of the repeal of the two-thirds rule...is difficult to overstate. not only did the power of the south in the democratic party diminish, but without the repeal it is open to question whether fdr could have been renominated in 1940."[180]

^ the 1964 democratic ticket of lyndon b. johnson and hubert humphrey would later set a new record, taking 61.1% of the popular vote

^ the two justices who roosevelt did not originally appoint to the court were harlan fiske stone and owen roberts. however, in 1941, roosevelt elevated stone to the position of chief justice.

^ this table shows the estimated unemployment related as calculated by two economists. michael darby's estimate counts individuals on work relief programs as employed, while stanley lebergott's estimate counts individuals on work relief programs as unemployed[206]

^ the twenty-second amendment ratified in 1951, would bar any individual from winning more than two presidential elections.

^ hull and others in the administration were unwilling to recognize the japanese conquest of china, and feared that an american accommodation with japan would leave the soviet union vulnerable to a two-front war.[262]

^ the united states would also declare war on bulgaria, hungary, and romania, all of which had joined the axis bloc.

^ the germans stopped research on nuclear weapons in 1942, choosing to focus on other projects. japan gave up its own program in 1943.[278]

^ wpa workers were counted as unemployed by this set of statistics.[299]


references


^ president franklin roosevelt 1933 inauguration. c-span. january 14, 2009. retrieved july 24, 2017  – via youtube..mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/65/lock-green.svg/9px-lock-green.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d6/lock-gray-alt-2.svg/9px-lock-gray-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/aa/lock-red-alt-2.svg/9px-lock-red-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration{color:#555}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration span{border-bottom:1px dotted;cursor:help}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/wikisource-logo.svg/12px-wikisource-logo.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output code.cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:inherit;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#33aa33;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-right{padding-right:0.2em}

^ houghton mifflin harcourt, the american heritage dictionary of the english language, houghton mifflin harcourt.

^ a b burns 1956, p. 7.

^ dallek 2017, p. 18.

^ a b dallek 2017, p. 19.

^ a b smith 2007, pp. 5–6.

^ maglaty, jeanne (april 7, 2011). "when did girls start wearing pink?". smithsonian.com.

^ smith 2007, p. 71.

^ lash 1971, p. 111.

^ burns 1956, p. 4.

^ smith 2007, p. 20-25.

^ gunther 1950, p. 169.

^ smith 2007, p. 110.

^ black 2005, p. 21.

^ burns 1956, p. 16.

^ gunther 1950, p. 174.

^ gunther 1950, p. 172.

^ smith 2007, p. 30.

^ burns 1956, pp. 18, 20.

^ "family of wealth gave advantages". the new york times. april 15, 1945. retrieved december 20, 2012.

^ gunther 1950, p. 176.

^ gunther 1950, p. 175.

^ dallek 2017, pp. 28–29.

^ burns 1956, p. 24.

^ burns 1956, p. 28.

^ "presidents roosevelt honored with posthumous columbia degrees". new york sun. september 26, 2008. retrieved april 6, 2018.

^ dallek 2017, pp. 38–39.

^ rowley 2010, pp. 3–6.

^ rowley 2010, p. 3.

^ smith 2007, pp. 37, 46–47.

^ burns 1956, p. 26.

^ gunther 1950, pp. 181–83.

^ dallek 2017, pp. 35–36.

^ brands 2009, p. 160.

^ smith 2007, pp. 54–55.

^ burns 1956, pp. 77–79.

^ smith 2007, pp. 57–58.

^ winkler 2006, pp. 19–20.

^ abate, frank r. (1999). the oxford desk dictionary of people and places. oxford university press. p. 329. isbn 978-0-19-513872-6.

^ smith 2007, p. 153.

^ smith 2007, p. 160.

^ winkler 2006, pp. 28, 38, 48–49.

^ a b winkler 2006, pp. 202–03.

^ gunther 1950, p. 195.

^ mcgrath, charles (april 20, 2008). "no end of the affair". the new york times.

^ "lucy page mercer rutherfurd". eleanor roosevelt papers. archived from the original on march 4, 2010. retrieved february 7, 2010.

^ tully 2005, p. 340.

^ goodwin 1995, p. 153.

^ rowley 2010, p. 254.

^ smith 2007, pp. 58–60.

^ a b dallek 2017, p. 41.

^ smith 2007, pp. 60–62.

^ smith 2007, pp. 60–64.

^ smith 2007, p. 65.

^ smith 2007, pp. 65–66.

^ gunther 1950, pp. 202–03.

^ a b burns 1956, p. 34.

^ smith 2007, pp. 68–69.

^ brands 2009, pp. 57–60.

^ gunther 1950, pp. 205–206.

^ burns 1956, p. 49.

^ black 2005, pp. 62–63.

^ burns 1956, pp. 44–46.

^ burns 1956, p. 43.

^ smith 2007, pp. 97–101.

^ burns 1956, p. 51.

^ gunther 1950, p. 209.

^ smith 2007, pp. 102–106.

^ smith 2007, pp. 113–114.

^ burns 1956, p. 52.

^ gunther 1950, p. 212.

^ smith 2007, pp. 122–123.

^ burns 1956, p. 56.

^ burns 1956, pp. 57, 60.

^ smith 2007, p. 125.

^ smith 2007, pp. 125–126.

^ dallek 2017, pp. 59–61.

^ smith 2007, pp. 130–132.

^ dallek 2017, pp. 62–63.

^ dallek 2017, pp. 65–66.

^ smith 2007, pp. 139–140.

^ dallek 2017, pp. 67–68.

^ goldman & goldman 2017, p. 15.

^ smith 2007, pp. 171–172.

^ underwood 1991, p. 11.

^ smith 2007, pp. 176–177.

^ smith 2007, pp. 177–181.

^ burns 1956, p. 73.

^ gunther 1950, pp. 215–16.

^ smith 2007, p. 181.

^ smith 2007, pp. 181–182.

^ smith 2007, pp. 175–176.

^ burns 1956, p. 74.

^ smith 2007, pp. 182–183.

^ a b smith 2007, pp. 184–185.

^ goldman & goldman 2017, pp. 108–147.

^ smith 2007, pp. 195–196.

^ rowley 2010, p. 125.

^ rowley 2010, p. 120.

^ ward & burns 2014, p. 332.

^ smith 2007, p. 220.

^ smith 2007, pp. 213–214.

^ smith 2007, pp. 215–219.

^ smith 2007, pp. 255–256.

^ dallek 2017, pp. 87–88.

^ dallek 2017, pp. 87–96.

^ morgan 1985, pp. 267, 269–72, 286–87.

^ black 2005, pp. 160–167.

^ a b c d caro 1974, pp. 289–291.

^ f. roosevelt, e. roosevelt, p. 21.

^ smith 2007, p. 231.

^ burns 1956, p. 100.

^ dallek 2017, pp. 96–98.

^ smith 2007, pp. 223–225.

^ smith 2007, pp. 225–228.

^ burns 1956, p. 101.

^ smith 2007, p. 229.

^ smith 2007, pp. 237–238.

^ smith 2007, pp. 230–233.

^ smith 2007, pp. 235–237.

^ smith 2007, pp. 238–239.

^ smith 2007, pp. 240–241.

^ smith 2007, pp. 242–243.

^ burns 1956, pp. 119–20.

^ smith 2007, pp. 243–244.

^ burns 1956, p. 121.

^ smith 2007, pp. 250–252.

^ allen, oliver e. (1993). the tiger: the rise and fall of tammany hall. addison-wesley publishing company. pp. 233–250. isbn 978-0-201-62463-2.

^ smith 2007, pp. 261–263.

^ brands 2009, pp. 232–236, 246–251.

^ burns 1956, p. 139.

^ smith 2007, pp. 276–277.

^ smith 2007, pp. 266–267.

^ smith 2007, p. 278.

^ smith 2007, p. 279.

^ smith 2007, pp. 282–284.

^ leuchtenburg 1963, pp. 183–96.

^ sternsher 1975, pp. 127–49.

^ campbell 2006, pp. 127–49.

^ smith 2007, pp. 290–291.

^ burns 1956, p. 146.

^ burns 1956, p. 148.

^ smith 2007, pp. 292–295.

^ burns 1956, p. 147.

^ davidson, amy (may 5, 2012). "the fdr new yorker cover that never ran". the new yorker.

^ burns 1970, pp. 347–48.

^ alter 2006, p. 190.

^ burns 1956, pp. 157, 167–68.

^ tobin 2013, pp. 4–7.

^ "franklin d. roosevelt's presidency". fdr presidential library & museum. retrieved january 29, 2018.

^ mcjimsey 2001, p. xxviii.

^ leuchtenburg 2015, pp. 147–148.

^ smith 2007, p. 312.

^ liptak, kevin (april 23, 2017). "history of measuring presidents' first 100 days". cnn. retrieved october 9, 2017.

^ smith 2007, pp. 315–316.

^ leuchtenburg 2015, pp. 151–152.

^ a b smith 2007, p. 322.

^ smith 2007, pp. 318–323.

^ hawley 1995, p. 124.

^ smith 2007, pp. 331–332.

^ smith 2007, p. 346.

^ savage 1991, p. 160.

^ freidel & 1952–73, pp. 4, 320–39.

^ freidel & 1952–73, pp. 4, 448–52.

^ dallek 2017, p. 249.

^ hausman, joshua k. (april 2016). "fiscal policy and economic recovery: the case of the 1936 veterans' bonus" (pdf). american economic review. 106 (4): 1100–1143. doi:10.1257/aer.20130957.

^ smith 2007, pp. 349–351.

^ social security history. ssa.gov. retrieved on july 14, 2013.

^ norton 2009, p. 670.

^ smith 2007, p. 353.

^ smith 2007, pp. 353–356.

^ kennedy 1999, p. 291.

^ colin gordon, new deals: business, labor, and politics in america, 1920–1935 (1994)  p. 225

^ brands 2009, pp. 463–467.

^ a b fried 2001, pp. 120–123.

^ burns 1956, p. 350.

^ burns 1956, p. 226.

^ roosevelt, franklin delano (1933). looking forward. john day. p. 141.

^ smith 2007, pp. 360–361.

^ smith 2007, p. 366.

^ smith 2007, pp. 364–366.

^ smith 2007, pp. 371–372.

^ burns 1956, p. 284.

^ smith 2007, pp. 373–375.

^ mary e. stuckey (2015). voting deliberatively: fdr and the 1936 presidential campaign. penn state up. p. 19. isbn 9780271071923.

^ "supreme court nominations: present-1789". united states senate. retrieved january 29, 2018.

^ kalman, laura (october 2005). "the constitution, the supreme court, and the new deal". the american historical review. 110 (4): 1052–1080. doi:10.1086/ahr.110.4.1052.

^ smith 2007, pp. 379–382.

^ burns 1956, p. 312.

^ smith 2007, pp. 384–389.

^ leuchtenburg, william e. (may 2005). "when franklin roosevelt clashed with the supreme court – and lost". smithsonian magazine. retrieved march 1, 2016.

^ leuchtenburg, e. (1996). the supreme court reborn: the constitutional revolution in the age of roosevelt. oxford university press. isbn 0-19-511131-1

^ blake, john (december 14, 2010). "how fdr unleashed his supreme court 'scorpions'". cnn. retrieved october 10, 2017.

^ belknap, michal (2004). the vinson court: justices, rulings, and legacy. abc-clio. pp. 162–163. isbn 9781576072011. retrieved march 3, 2016.

^ smith 2007, pp. 390–391.

^ smith 2007, pp. 408–409.

^ leuchtenburg 2015, pp. 187–188.

^ burns 1956, p. 320.

^ leuchtenburg 1963, pp. 239–43.

^ leuchtenburg 1963, pp. 262–63, 271–73.

^ smith 2007, pp. 440–441.

^ leshy, john (2009). "fdr's expansion of our national patrimony: a model for leadership".  in woolner, david; henderson, henry l. fdr and the environment. springer. pp. 177–178. isbn 9780230100671.

^ "the national parks: america's best idea: history episode 5: 1933–1945". pbs. retrieved april 23, 2016.

^ brinkley 2016, pp. 170–86.

^ maher, neil m. (july 2002). "a new deal body politic: landscape, labor, and the civilian conservation corps" (pdf). environmental history. 7 (3): 435–461. doi:10.2307/3985917. jstor 3985917.

^ a b margo, robert a. (spring 1993). "employment and unemployment in the 1930s". journal of economic perspectives. 7 (2): 42–43. citeseerx 10.1.1.627.1613. doi:10.1257/jep.7.2.41.

^ a b historical statistics of the united states, colonial times to 1970. the bureau of the u.s. census. 1976. pp. y457, y493, f32.

^ "presidents and job growth" (gif). the new york times (graphic). july 2, 2003.

^ historical statistics of the united states, colonial times to 1970. the bureau of the u.s. census. 1976. p. f31.

^ leuchtenburg 1963, pp. 203–10.

^ smith 2007, pp. 341–343.

^ doenecke & stoler 2005, p. 18.

^ burns 1956, p. 254.

^ burns 1956, p. 255.

^ smith 2007, pp. 417–418.

^ burns 1956, p. 256.

^ dallek 1995, p. 180.

^ dallek 1995, pp. 146–147.

^ leuchtenburg 2015, pp. 188–90.

^ "travels of president franklin d. roosevelt". office of the historian, bureau of public affairs. u.s. department of state. retrieved december 2, 2015.

^ smith 2007, pp. 423–424.

^ dallek 1995, pp. 166–73.

^ smith 2007, pp. 425–426.

^ smith 2007, pp. 426–429.

^ black 2005, pp. 503–06.

^ smith 2007, pp. 436–441.

^ gunther 1950, p. 15.

^ "roosevelt and churchill:  a friendship that saved the world". national park service.

^ leuchtenburg 1963, pp. 399–402.

^ burns 1956, p. 420.

^ smith 2007, pp. 464–466.

^ burns 1956, p. 438.

^ burns 1956, pp. 408–30.

^ a b moe, richard (2013). roosevelt's second act: the election of 1940 and the politics of war. oxford university press. pp. 229–246. isbn 9780199981915.

^ dallek 2017, pp. 389–390.

^ smith 2007, p. 472.

^ smith 2007, pp. 474–475.

^ smith 2007, pp. 476–477.

^ burns 1956, p. 454.

^ herman 2012, pp. 128–29.

^ smith 2007, pp. 487–488.

^ smith 2007, pp. 489–490.

^ burns 1970, p. 95.

^ charles, douglas m. (spring 2000). "informing fdr: fbi political surveillance and the isolationist-interventionist foreign policy". diplomatic history. 24 (2): 211–32. doi:10.1111/0145-2096.00210.

^ churchill 1977, p. 119.

^ media sound & culture in latin america. editors: bronfman, alejanda & wood, andrew grant. university of pittsburgh press, pittsburg, pa, usa, 2012, pgs. 41-54 isbn 978-0-8229-6187-1 books.google.com see pgs. 41-54

^ anthony, edwin d. records of the office of inter-american affairs. national archives and record services - general services administration, washington d.c., 1973, p. 1-8 library of congress catalog no. 73-600146 records of the office of inter-american affairs at the u.s. national archive at www.archives.gov

^ thomson, charles alexander holmes, overseas information service of the united states government, the brookings institution, 1948. cf. p.4.

^ dissonant divas in chicana music: the limits of la onda deborah r. vargas. university of minnesota press, minneapolis, 2012 p. 152-157 isbn 978-0-8166-7316-2 ociaa (office of the coordinator of inter-american affairs), fdr's good neighbor policy, cbs, viva america, la cadena de las americas on google.books.com

^ "84 - executive order 8840 establishing the office of coordinator of inter-american affairs, july 30, 1941", the american presidency project

^ "1941: executive order 8840", federal register, 1941.

^ burns 1970, pp. 126–28.

^ gunther 1950, pp. 15–16.

^ smith 2007, p. 502.

^ burns 1970, pp. 141–42.

^ smith 2007, pp. 506–508.

^ smith 2007, pp. 509–510.

^ smith 2007, pp. 510–511.

^ smith 2007, pp. 513–514.

^ burns 1970, pp. 134–46.

^ smith 2007, pp. 516–517.

^ smith 2007, pp. 522–523.

^ smith 2007, pp. 518–530.

^ smith 2007, pp. 531–533.

^ smith 2007, pp. 533–539.

^ sainsbury 1994, p. 184.

^ maffeo, steven e., capt. (2015). u.s. navy codebreakers, linguists, and intelligence officers against japan, 1910–1941: a biographical dictionary. rowman & littlefield. p. 311. isbn 978-1-4422-5564-7.

^ smith 2007, pp. 523–539.

^ burns 1970, p. 159.

^ smith 2007, pp. 545–547.

^ burns 1970, pp. 180–85.

^ smith 2007, p. 547.

^ chambers, john whiteclay (1999). the oxford companion to american military history. oxford university press, usa. p. 351. isbn 978-0-19-507198-6.

^ smith 2007, p. 546.

^ a b smith 2007, pp. 598–599.

^ fullilove, michael (2013). rendezvous with destiny: how franklin d. roosevelt and five extraordinary men took america into the war and into the world. penguin press. pp. 147–149. isbn 978-1594204357.

^ brands 2009, pp. 678–680.

^ smith 2007, p. 580.

^ smith 2007, pp. 578–581.

^ doenecke & stoler 2005, pp. 109–110.

^ smith 2007, pp. 557–559.

^ smith 2007, pp. 560–561.

^ smith 2007, pp. 587–588.

^ leuchtenburg 2015, pp. 214–216.

^ smith 2007, pp. 623–624.

^ leuchtenburg 2015, pp. 233–234.

^ herring 2008, pp. 584–587.

^ bumiller, elizabeth (may 16, 2005). "60 years later, debating yalta all over again". new york times. retrieved october 14, 2017.

^ smith 2007, pp. 563–564.

^ smith 2007, pp. 565–567.

^ smith 2007, pp. 573–574.

^ a b c smith 2007, pp. 575–576.

^ smith 2007, pp. 581–582.

^ smith 2007, pp. 596–597.

^ smith 2007, pp. 613–617.

^ smith 2007, pp. 630–631.

^ burns 1970, p. 228.

^ brands 2009, p. 785.

^ statistical abstract, us: bureau of the census, 1946, p. 173

^ schweikart & allen 2004, p. 602.

^ leuchtenburg 2015, pp. 221–222.

^ burns 1970, p. 436.

^ burns 1970, p. 333.

^ burns 1970, p. 343.

^ herman 2012, pp. 139–44, 151, 246.

^ smith 2007, pp. 571–572.

^ burns 1970, pp. 339–42.

^ leuchtenburg 2015, pp. 223–225.

^ a b zeitz, joshua (november 4, 2018). "democrats aren't moving left. they're returning to their roots". politico. retrieved november 17, 2018.

^ smith 2007, pp. 584–585.

^ "medical research pays off for all americans". nih medline plus. national institutes of health. summer 2007. retrieved july 25, 2014.

^ hastings, max (january 19, 2009). "franklin d roosevelt: the man who conquered fear". the independent. retrieved july 25, 2014.

^ burns 1970, p. 448.

^ lerner, barron h. (november 23, 2007). "how much confidence should we have in the doctor's account of fdr's death?". history news network. george washington university.

^ bruenn, howard g. (april 1970). "clinical notes on the illness & death of president franklin d. roosevelt". annals of internal medicine. 72 (4): 579–91. doi:10.7326/0003-4819-72-4-579. pmid 4908628.

^ gunther 1950, pp. 372–74.

^ dallek 2017, pp. 618–619.

^ smith 2007, pp. 617–619.

^ jordan 2011, p. 321.

^ burns 1970, pp. 533, 562.

^ dallek 1995, p. 520.

^ burns 1970, p. 587.

^ "president franklin d. roosevelt dies at 63 in 1945". new york daily news. april 13, 1945. retrieved december 29, 2017.

^ jones, jeffrey m.; jones, joni l. (september 2006). "presidential stroke: united states presidents and cerebrovascular disease". cns spectrums (the international journal of neuropsychiatric medicine). 11 (9): 674–78. doi:10.1017/s1092852900014760.

^ dallek 2017, p. 620.

^ allies overrun germany (video). universal newsreel. 1945. retrieved february 21, 2012.

^ mccullough, david (1992). truman. simon & schuster. pp. 345, 381. isbn 978-0-671-86920-5.

^ leuchtenburg 2015, pp. 243–252.

^ "jewish vote in u.s. elections". jerusalem center for public affairs. retrieved february 7, 2010.

^ odo, franklin (2002). the columbia documentary history of the asian american experience. columbia university press. p. 5. isbn 978-0-231-11030-3.

^ sitkoff, harvard (1978). a new deal for blacks: the emergence of civil rights as a national issue. oxford university press. p. 71. isbn 978-0-19-502418-0.

^ a b mcjimsey 2000, pp. 162–163.

^ dallek 2017, pp. 307–308.

^ collins, william j. (march 2001). "race, roosevelt, and wartime production: fair employment in world war ii labor markets". the american economic review. 91 (1): 272–286. doi:10.1257/aer.91.1.272. jstor 2677909.

^ smith 2007, pp. 549–553.

^ "world war ii enemy alien control program overview". national archives. september 23, 2016.

^ smith 2007, pp. 426–428.

^ smith 2007, pp. 607–613.

^ "the 100 most influential figures in american history". the atlantic. december 2006. retrieved october 13, 2017.

^ walsh, kenneth t. (april 10, 2015). "fdr: the president who made america into a superpower". us news and world report. retrieved october 13, 2017.

^ "presidential historians survey 2017". c-span survey of presidential leadership. c-span.

^ "presidential leadership – the rankings". wall street journal. dow jones & company. september 12, 2005. archived from the original on november 2, 2005. retrieved may 4, 2015.

^ "new ranking of u.s. presidents puts lincoln at no. 1, obama at 18; kennedy judged most overrated". washington post. february 16, 2015. retrieved may 4, 2015.

^ schlesinger, arthur m., jr. (summer 1997). "ranking the presidents: from washington to clinton". political science quarterly. 112 (2): 179–190. doi:10.2307/2657937. jstor 2657937.

^ smith 2007, p. ix.

^ schlesinger, arthur m., jr (2007) [1963], "liberalism in america: a note for europeans", the politics of hope, riverside press, isbn 9780691134758

^ black 2005, pp. 1126–27.

^ leuchtenburg 2015, pp. 174–175.

^ leuchtenburg, william e. (2001), in the shadow of fdr: from harry truman to george w. bush, cornell university press, isbn 978-0801487378

^ dallek 2017, pp. 624–625.

^ wyman 1984.

^ robinson 2001.

^ dallek 2017, p. 626.

^ "franklin delano roosevelt memorial". national park service. retrieved january 19, 2018.

^ jessiekratz (april 10, 2015). "the other fdr memorial". pieces of history. national archives. retrieved june 19, 2017.

^ "conservatives want reagan to replace fdr on u.s. dimes". usa today. ap. december 5, 2003. retrieved january 22, 2018.


works cited
.mw-parser-output .refbegin{font-size:90%;margin-bottom:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indents>ul{list-style-type:none;margin-left:0}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indents>ul>li,.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indents>dl>dd{margin-left:0;padding-left:3.2em;text-indent:-3.2em;list-style:none}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-100{font-size:100%}
alter, jonathan (2006), the defining moment: fdr's hundred days and the triumph of hope (popular history), simon & schuster, isbn 978-0-7432-4600-2
black, conrad (2005) [2003]. franklin delano roosevelt: champion of freedom (interpretive detailed biography). publicaffairs. isbn 978-1-58648-282-4..
brands, h. w. (2009). traitor to his class: the privileged life and radical presidency of franklin delano roosevelt. anchor books. isbn 978-0-307-27794-7.
brinkley, douglas (2016). rightful heritage: franklin d. roosevelt and the land of america. harpercollins. isbn 978-0-06-208923-6.
burns, james macgregor (1956). roosevelt: the lion and the fox. easton press. isbn 978-0-15-678870-0.
——— (1970). roosevelt: the soldier of freedom. harcourt brace jovanovich. hdl:2027/heb.00626. isbn 978-0-15-678870-0.
campbell, james e. (2006). "party systems and realignments in the united states, 1868–2004". social science history. 30 (3): 359–386. doi:10.1215/01455532-2006-002. jstor 40267912.
caro, robert a. (1974). the power broker: robert moses and the fall of new york. alfred a. knopf, inc. isbn 978-0-394-48076-3.
churchill, winston (1977). the grand alliance. houghton mifflin harcourt. isbn 978-0-395-41057-8.
dallek, robert (1995). franklin d. roosevelt and american foreign policy, 1932–1945. oxford university. isbn 978-0-19-509732-0.
——— (2017). franklin d. roosevelt: a political life. viking. isbn 978-0-69-818172-4.
doenecke, justus d; stoler, mark a (2005), debating franklin d. roosevelt's foreign policies, 1933–1945, rowman & littlefield, isbn 978-0-8476-9415-0
freidel, frank (1952–73), franklin d. roosevelt, 4 volumes, little, brown and co., oclc 459748221
frank freidel, franklin d. roosevelt the apprenticeship (vol 1 1952) to 1918, online
frank freidel, franklin d. roosevelt the ordeal (1954), covers 1919 to 1928,  online
frank freidel, franklin d. roosevelt the triumph (1956) covers 1929–32, online
frank freidel, franklin d. roosevelt launching the new deal (1973).
fried, albert (2001). fdr and his enemies: a history. st. martin's press. pp. 120–23. isbn 978-1-250-10659-9.
goldman, armond s.; goldman, daniel a. (2017). prisoners of time: the misdiagnosis of fdr's 1921 illness. ehdp press. isbn 978-1-939-82403-5.
goodwin, doris kearns (1995). no ordinary time: franklin and eleanor roosevelt: the home front in world war ii. simon & schuster. isbn 978-0-684-80448-4.
gunther, john (1950). roosevelt in retrospect. harper & brothers.
hawley, ellis (1995). the new deal and the problem of monopoly. fordham university press. isbn 978-0-8232-1609-3.
herman, arthur (2012). freedom's forge: how american business produced victory in world war ii. random house. isbn 978-0-679-60463-1.
herring, george c. (2008). from colony to superpower; u.s. foreign relations since 1776. oxford university press. isbn 978-0-19-507822-0.
jordan, david m (2011), fdr, dewey, and the election of 1944, indiana university press, isbn 978-0-253-35683-3.
kennedy, david m (1999), freedom from fear: the american people in depression and war, 1929–1945 (wide-ranging survey of national affairs by leading scholar; pulitzer prize), oxford university press, isbn 978-0-19-503834-7.
lash, joseph p (1971). eleanor and franklin: the story of their relationship based on eleanor roosevelt's private papers. w. w. norton & company. isbn 978-0-393-07459-8.
leuchtenburg, william (2015). the american president: from teddy roosevelt to bill clinton. oxford university press. isbn 978-0195176162.
leuchtenburg, william e. (1963). franklin d. roosevelt and the new deal, 1932–1940. harpers. isbn 978-0-06-133025-4.
mcjimsey, george t. (2001). documentary history of the franklin d. roosevelt presidency: the bank holiday and the emergency banking act, march 1933. university publications of america. p. xxviii. isbn 978-1-55655-780-4.
mcjimsey, george (2000). the presidency of franklin delano roosevelt. university press of kansas. isbn 978-0-7006-1012-9.
morgan, ted (1985), fdr: a biography (popular biography), simon & schuster, isbn 978-0-671-45495-1.
norton, mary beth (2009). a people and a nation: a history of the united states. since 1865. cengage. isbn 978-0547175607.
robinson, greg (2001), by order of the president: fdr and the internment of japanese americans, isbn 978-1522677710
roosevelt, franklin; roosevelt, elliott (1970). f.d.r.: his personal letters, 1928-1945. 1. duell, sloan, and pearce.
rowley, hazel (2010). franklin and eleanor: an extraordinary marriage. farrar, straus & giroux. isbn 978-0-374-15857-6.
sainsbury, keith (1994). churchill and roosevelt at war: the war they fought and the peace they hoped to make. new york university press. isbn 978-0-8147-7991-0.
savage, sean j. (1991). roosevelt, the party leader, 1932–1945. university press of kentucky. isbn 978-0-8131-3079-8.
schweikart, larry; allen, michael (2004). a patriot's history of the united states: from columbus's great discovery to the war on terror. penguin group us. isbn 978-1-101-21778-8.
smith, jean edward (2007). fdr. random house. isbn 978-1-4000-6121-1.
sternsher, bernard (summer 1975), "the emergence of the new deal party system: a problem in historical analysis of voter behavior", journal of interdisciplinary history, 6 (1): 127–49, doi:10.2307/202828, jstor 202828
tobin, james (2013). the man he became: how fdr defied polio to win the presidency. simon and schuster. pp. 4–7. isbn 978-1-4516-9867-1.
tully, grace (2005). franklin delano roosevelt, my boss. kessinger publishing. isbn 978-1-4179-8926-3.
underwood, jeffery s. (1991). the wings of democracy: the influence of air power on the roosevelt administration, 1933–1941. texas a&m university press. isbn 978-0-89096-388-3.
ward, geoffrey c.; burns, ken (2014). the roosevelts: an intimate history. knopf doubleday publishing group. isbn 978-0-385-35306-9.
winkler, allan m. (2006). franklin d. roosevelt and the making of modern america. longman. isbn 978-0-321-41285-0.
wyman, david s (1984), the abandonment of the jews: america and the holocaust 1941–1945, pantheon books, isbn 978-0394428130.

further reading
main article: bibliography of franklin d. roosevelt

biographical
daniels, roger (2015). franklin d. roosevelt: road to the new deal, 1882–1939. university of illinois press. isbn 978-0-252-03951-5..
——— (2016). franklin d. roosevelt: the war years, 1939–1945. university of illinois press. isbn 978-0-252-03952-2.
freidel, frank (1990), franklin d. roosevelt: a rendezvous with destiny (scholarly biography), one volume, isbn 978-0-316-29260-3; covers entire life
jenkins, roy (2003), franklin delano roosevelt (short bio from british perspective), isbn 978-0-8050-6959-4.
pederson, william d., ed. (2011). a companion to franklin d. roosevelt. john wiley & sons. isbn 978-1-4443-9517-4.; 35 essays by scholars. online
ward, geoffrey c (1985), before the trumpet: young franklin roosevelt, 1882–1905, isbn 978-0-06-015451-6
——— (1992), a first-class temperament: the emergence of franklin roosevelt (popular biography), isbn 978-0-06-016066-1: covers 1905–32.
scholarly topical studies
badger, anthony (2008), fdr: the first hundred days, isbn 978-0-8090-4441-2 200 pp; overview by leading british scholar.
collins, robert m. (2002). more: the politics of economic growth in postwar america. oxford university press. isbn 978-0-19-515263-0.
leuchtenburg, william e (2005), "showdown on the court", smithsonian, 36 (2): 106–13, issn 0037-7333.
mcmahon, kevin j (2004), reconsidering roosevelt on race: how the presidency paved the road to brown, isbn 978-0-226-50088-1.
miscamble, wilson d. (2007). from roosevelt to truman: potsdam, hiroshima, and the cold war. cambridge university press. isbn 978-0-521-86244-8.
pederson, william d (2011), a companion to franklin d. roosevelt, wiley-blackwell, isbn 978-1-4443-3016-8, 768 pages; essays by scholars covering major historiographical themes. online
rauchway, eric (2008), the great depression and the new deal; a very short introduction, isbn 978-0-19-532634-5, balanced summary
ritchie, donald a (2007), electing fdr: the new deal campaign of 1932, isbn 978-0-7006-1687-9.
rosen, elliot a (2005), roosevelt, the great depression, and the economics of recovery, isbn 978-0-8139-2368-0.
schlesinger, arthur m. jr (1957–60), the age of roosevelt, 3 volumes, oclc 466716, the classic narrative history. strongly supports fdr.
shaw, stephen k; pederson, william d; williams, frank j, eds. (2004), franklin d. roosevelt and the transformation of the supreme court, isbn 978-0-7656-1033-1.
sitkoff, harvard, ed. (1985), fifty years later: the new deal evaluated (essays by scholars), isbn 978-0-394-33548-3.
foreign policy and world war ii
berthon, simon; potts, joanna (2007). warlords: an extraordinary re-creation of world war ii through the eyes and minds of hitler, churchill, roosevelt, and stalin. da capo press. isbn 978-0-306-81650-5.
beschloss, michael (2002). the conquerors: roosevelt, truman, and the destruction of hitler's germany, 1941–1945. simon & schuster. isbn 978-0-684-81027-0.
cole, wayne s (mar 1957), "american entry into world war ii: a historiographical appraisal", the mississippi valley historical review, 43 (4): 595–617, doi:10.2307/1902275, jstor 1902275.
glantz, mary e (2005), fdr and the soviet union: the president's battles over foreign policy, u. press of kansas, isbn 978-0-7006-1365-6, 253 pp.
hamilton, nigel (2014), the mantle of command: fdr at war, 1941–1942, houghton mifflin harcourt 514 pp.
kaiser, david. no end save victory: how fdr led the nation into war (2014) isbn 046501982x
langer, william; gleason, s everett (1952), the challenge to isolation, 1937–1940, oclc 1448535. the undeclared war, 1940–1941 (1953) oclc 404227. highly detailed and influential two-volume semi-official history
mayers, david. (2013) fdr's ambassadors and the diplomacy of crisis: from the rise of hitler to the end of world war ii.
larrabee, eric (2004), commander in chief: franklin delano roosevelt, his lieutenants, and their war, isbn 978-0-06-039050-1.
reynolds, david (2006), from world war to cold war: churchill, roosevelt, and the international history of the 1940s, isbn 978-0-19-928411-5
sherwood, robert e (1949) [1950], roosevelt and hopkins: an intimate history, harper, hdl:2027/heb.00749, pulitzer prize.
weinberg, gerhard l (1994), a world at arms: a global history of world war ii, cambridge university press, hdl:2027/heb.00331, isbn 978-0-521-44317-3. overall history of the war; strong on diplomacy of fdr and other main leaders.
criticism
barnes, harry elmer (1953), perpetual war for perpetual peace: a critical examination of the foreign policy of franklin delano roosevelt and its aftermath, oclc 457149. a revisionist blames fdr for inciting japan to attack.
best, gary dean (1991), pride, prejudice, and politics: roosevelt versus recovery, 1933–1938, praeger, isbn 978-0-275-93524-5; summarizes newspaper editorials.
——— (2002), the retreat from liberalism: collectivists versus progressives in the new deal years, praeger, isbn 978-0-275-94656-2; criticizes intellectuals who supported fdr.
breitman, richard; lichtman, allan j (2013), fdr and the jews, harvard university press, isbn 978-0-674-05026-6, oclc 812248674, 433 pp.
russett, bruce m (1997), no clear and present danger: a skeptical view of the united states entry into world war ii (2nd ed.), says us should have let ussr and germany destroy each other.
plaud, joseph j (2005), historical perspectives on franklin d. roosevelt, american foreign policy, and the holocaust, the fdr american heritage center museum, archived from the original on january 12, 2014.
powell, jim (2003), fdr's folly: how roosevelt and his new deal prolonged the great depression, isbn 978-0-7615-0165-7.
schivelbusch, wolfgang (2006), three new deals: reflections on roosevelt's america, mussolini's italy, and hitler's germany, 1933–1939.
shlaes, amity (2007), the forgotten man: a new history of the great depression (a critical evaluation of the effect of the new deal's policies on the depression)
smiley, gene (1993), rethinking the great depression (short essay) by libertarian economist who blames both hoover and fdr.
fdr's rhetoric
buhite, russell d; levy, david w, eds. (1993), fdr's fireside chats.
craig, douglas b (2005), fireside politics: radio and political culture in the united states, 1920–1940.
crowell, laura (1952), "building the 'four freedoms' speech", communication monographs, 22 (5): 266–83, doi:10.1080/03637755509375153.
houck, davis w (2001), rhetoric as currency: hoover, roosevelt, and the great depression, texas a&m university press.
——— (2002), fdr and fear itself: the first inaugural address, texas a&m university press.
roosevelt, franklin d. (2005), my friends: twenty eight history making speeches, kessinger publishing, isbn 978-1-4179-9610-0
——— (1988), franklin d. roosevelt's rhetorical presidency, greenwood press.
historiography
hendrickson, jr., kenneth e. "fdr biographies," in william d. pederson, ed. a companion to franklin d. roosevelt (2011) pp 1–14 online
provizer, norman w. "eleanor roosevelt biographies," in william d. pederson, ed. a companion to franklin d. roosevelt (2011) pp 15–33 online
primary sources
cantril, hadley; strunk, mildred, eds. (1951), public opinion, 1935–1946, massive compilation of many public opinion polls from the usa.
loewenheim, francis l; langley, harold d, eds. (1975), roosevelt and churchill: their secret wartime correspondence.
nixon, edgar b, ed. (1969), franklin d roosevelt and foreign affairs (3 vol), covers 1933–37. 2nd series 1937–39 available on microfiche and in a 14 vol print edition at some academic libraries.
roosevelt, franklin delano (1945) [1938],  rosenman, samuel irving, ed., the public papers and addresses of franklin d. roosevelt, 13 volumes.
——— (1946),  zevin, bd, ed., nothing to fear: the selected addresses of franklin delano roosevelt, 1932–1945.
——— (2005) [1947],  taylor, myron c, ed., wartime correspondence between president roosevelt and pope pius xii (reprint), kessinger publishing, isbn 978-1-4191-6654-9.

external links

franklin d. rooseveltat wikipedia's sister projects


definitions from wiktionary
media from wikimedia commons
quotations from wikiquote
texts from wikisource



white house biography
franklin d. roosevelt presidential library and museum
franklin delano roosevelt memorial, washington, dc
full text and audio of a number of roosevelt's speeches – miller center of public affairs
"franklin d. roosevelt collected news and commentary". the new york times. retrieved february 17, 2018.
finding aid to franklin delano roosevelt collection, 1914–1945 at the new york state library, accessed may 18, 2016.
franklin delano roosevelt: a resource guide from the library of congress
"life portrait of franklin d. roosevelt", from c-span's american presidents: life portraits, october 11, 1999
franklin d roosevelt: the man who conquered fear by the independent's max hastings on january 19, 2009. archived from the original on august 6, 2014.
the presidents: fdr – an american experience documentary
franklin delano roosevelt: selections from his writings
franklin d. roosevelt at curlie
works by franklin delano roosevelt at project gutenberg
works by franklin d. roosevelt at librivox (public domain audiobooks) 
works by franklin d. roosevelt at faded page (canada)
works by or about franklin d. roosevelt at internet archive
franklin d. roosevelt personal manuscripts
fdr's ties to georgia from the digital library of georgia
appearances on c-span
newspaper clippings about  franklin d. roosevelt in the 20th century press archives of the german national library of economics (zbw)
vtefranklin d. roosevelt
32nd president of the united states (1933–1945)
44th governor of new york (1929–1932)
assistant secretary of the navy (1913–1920)
new york state senator (1911–1913)
presidency
inaugurations (1st
2nd
3rd
4th)
new deal
overview
new deal coalition
first 100 days
second new deal
federal emergency relief administration
civilian conservation corps
agricultural adjustment administration
emergency banking act
tennessee valley authority
national labor relations act
national industry recovery act
public works administration
national recovery administration
works progress administration
national youth administration
social security act
aid to families with dependent children
communications act of 1934
federal communications commission
securities and exchange commission
monetary gold ownership
gold reserve act
silver seizure
record on civil rights
defense industry non-discrimination
fair employment practices commission
indian reorganization act
executive orders 9066, 9102
war relocation authority
japanese american internment
german-american internment
italian-american internment
brownlow committee
executive office of the president
g.i. bill of rights
cullen–harrison act
roerich pact
four freedoms
four freedoms monument
black cabinet
jefferson's birthday holiday
judicial court-packing bill
federal judicial appointments
supreme court
cabinet
"brain trust"
march of dimes
modern oval office
official car
criticism
presidentialforeign policy
banana wars
u.s. occupation of nicaragua, 1912–1933
u.s. occupation of haiti, 1915–1934
good neighbor policy (1933–1945)
montevideo convention (1933)
second london naval treaty (1936)
abcd line (1940)
export control act
four policemen
lend-lease
1940 selective service act
atlantic charter (1941)
military history of the united states during world war ii
home front during world war ii
combined munitions assignments board
war production board
declaration by united nations (1942)
dumbarton oaks conference
world war ii conferences
quebec agreement
europe first
morgentau plan support
presidentialspeeches
commonwealth club address
madison square garden speech
"four freedoms"
infamy speech
arsenal of democracy
"...is fear itself"
fireside chats
"look to norway"
quarantine speech
"the more abundant life"
second bill of rights
state of the union address (1934
1938
1939
1940
1941
1945)
other events
early life, education, career
warm springs institute
governorship of new york
business plot
assassination attempt
elections
new york state election, 1928
1930
democratic national convention, 1920
1924
1932
1936
1940
1944
united states presidential election, 1920
1932
theme song
1936
1940
1944
life and homes
early life and education
groton school
"springwood" birthplace, home, and gravesite
campobello home
paralytic illness
top cottage
little white house, warm springs, georgia
legacy
presidential library and museum
roosevelt institute
roosevelt institute campus network
franklin delano roosevelt memorial
roosevelt island
four freedoms park
white house roosevelt room
roosevelt study center
four freedoms award
four freedoms paintings
unfinished portrait
u.s. postage stamps
roosevelt dime
films
the roosevelt story 1947
sunrise at campobello 1960
eleanor and franklin 1976, the white house years 1977
world war ii: when lions roared
warm springs 2005
hyde park on hudson 2012
the roosevelts 2014 documentary
other namesakes
roosevelt familydelano family
anna eleanor roosevelt (wife)
anna eleanor roosevelt (daughter)
james roosevelt ii (son)
elliott roosevelt (son)
franklin delano roosevelt jr. (son)
john aspinwall roosevelt ii (son)
eleanor roosevelt seagraves (granddaughter)
curtis roosevelt (grandson)
sara delano roosevelt (granddaughter)
franklin delano roosevelt iii (grandson)
john roosevelt boettiger (grandson)
james roosevelt iii (grandson)
james roosevelt i (father)
sara ann delano (mother)
james roosevelt roosevelt (half-brother)
isaac roosevelt (grandfather)
jacobus roosevelt (great-grandfather)
fala (family dog)

← herbert hoover
harry s. truman →
 category

vtenew dealcauses and legacy
great depression
new deal coalition
brain trust
american liberty league
criticism
new deal
emergency banking act
economy act
agricultural adjustment act
civilian conservation corps (ccc)
civil works administration
communications act
executive order 6102
homeowners refinancing act
farm credit administration
federal deposit insurance corporation (fdic)
federal emergency relief administration
frazier–lemke farm bankruptcy act
glass–steagall act
national industrial recovery act
national housing act
national recovery administration
national youth administration
public works administration (pwa)
public works of art project
reciprocal tariff act
railroad retirement act
securities act
tennessee valley authority (tva)
second new deal
works progress administration (wpa)
federal project number one
federal energy regulatory commission
farm security administration
judicial procedures reform act
national bituminous coal conservation act
national labor relations board (act)
rural electrification act
rural electrification administration
social security
united states housing authority
individuals
franklin d. roosevelt
harold l. ickes
frances perkins
harry hopkins
henry morgenthau, jr.
huey long
herbert hoover
robert f. wagner

category
commons

vteeleanor roosevelt
chairwoman, presidential commission on the status of women (1961–1962)
34th first lady of the united states (1933–1945)
united nations
united states delegate, united nations general assembly (1946–1952)
united nations commission on human rights (1947–1953, chairperson 1946–1951)
universal declaration of human rights
human rights day
first lady ofthe united states
"my day" daily newspaper column, 1935–1962
co-chair, office of civilian defense
marian anderson lincoln memorial concert
tuskegee airmen flight
arthurdale and eleanor, west virginia
american youth congress
national youth administration
black cabinet
1940 democratic national convention speech
women in defense
freedom house
other events
first lady of new york
presidential commission on the status of women
national organization for women
encampment for citizenship
life and homes
val-kill national historic site
val-kill industries
campobello home
franklin d. roosevelt's paralytic illness
hyde park home and gravesite
legacy
roosevelt institute
roosevelt institute campus network
roosevelt study center
eleanor roosevelt monument
eleanor roosevelt award for human rights
statue at the franklin roosevelt memorial
eleanor roosevelt college
marian anderson: the lincoln memorial concert (1939 film)
sunrise at campobello (1958 play, 1960 film)
the eleanor roosevelt story (1965 film)
eleanor and franklin (1976 film)
eleanor and franklin: the white house years (1977 film)
the roosevelts (2014 documentary)
related
united nations prize in the field of human rights
international bill of human rights
international covenant on economic, social and cultural rights
international covenant on civil and political rights
morgenthau plan
roosevelt family
franklin d. roosevelt (husband
presidency)
anna eleanor roosevelt (daughter)
james roosevelt ii (son)
elliott roosevelt (son)
franklin d. roosevelt jr. (son)
john roosevelt ii (son)
eleanor roosevelt seagraves (granddaughter)
curtis roosevelt (grandson)
sara delano roosevelt (granddaughter)
franklin delano roosevelt iii (grandson)
john roosevelt boettiger (grandson)
james roosevelt iii (grandson)
elliott bulloch roosevelt (father)
anna hall roosevelt (mother)
hall roosevelt (brother)
theodore roosevelt sr. (grandfather)
martha stewart bulloch (grandmother)
theodore roosevelt (uncle
presidency)
bamie roosevelt (aunt)
fala (family dog)

offices and distinctions


new york state senate


preceded byjohn f. schlosser

 member of the new york senatefrom the 26th district1911–1913

succeeded byjames e. towner


political offices


preceded bybeekman winthrop

 assistant secretary of the navy1913–1920

succeeded bygordon woodbury


preceded byal smith

 governor of new york1929–1932

succeeded byherbert h. lehman


preceded byherbert hoover

 president of the united states1933–1945

succeeded byharry s. truman


party political offices


preceded bythomas r. marshall

 democratic nominee for vice president of the united states1920

succeeded bycharles w. bryan


preceded byal smith

 democratic nominee for governor of new york1928, 1930

succeeded byherbert h. lehman


 democratic nominee for president of the united states1932, 1936, 1940, 1944

succeeded byharry s. truman


awards and achievements


preceded byrené viviani

 cover of timemay 28, 1923

succeeded byjohn l. lewis


preceded bydonald wills douglas sr.

 cover of timenovember 29, 1943

succeeded byclaire lee chennault


other articles related to franklin d. roosevelt
vtepresidents of the united states
george washington (1789–1797)
john adams (1797–1801)
thomas jefferson (1801–1809)
james madison (1809–1817)
james monroe (1817–1825)
john quincy adams (1825–1829)
andrew jackson (1829–1837)
martin van buren (1837–1841)
william henry harrison (1841)
john tyler (1841–1845)
james k. polk (1845–1849)
zachary taylor (1849–1850)
millard fillmore (1850–1853)
franklin pierce (1853–1857)
james buchanan (1857–1861)
abraham lincoln (1861–1865)
andrew johnson (1865–1869)
ulysses s. grant (1869–1877)
rutherford b. hayes (1877–1881)
james a. garfield (1881)
chester a. arthur (1881–1885)
grover cleveland (1885–1889)
benjamin harrison (1889–1893)
grover cleveland (1893–1897)
william mckinley (1897–1901)
theodore roosevelt (1901–1909)
william howard taft (1909–1913)
woodrow wilson (1913–1921)
warren g. harding (1921–1923)
calvin coolidge (1923–1929)
herbert hoover (1929–1933)
franklin d. roosevelt (1933–1945)
harry s. truman (1945–1953)
dwight d. eisenhower (1953–1961)
john f. kennedy (1961–1963)
lyndon b. johnson (1963–1969)
richard nixon (1969–1974)
gerald ford (1974–1977)
jimmy carter (1977–1981)
ronald reagan (1981–1989)
george h. w. bush (1989–1993)
bill clinton (1993–2001)
george w. bush (2001–2009)
barack obama (2009–2017)
donald trump (2017–present)presidency timelines
wilson
harding
coolidge
hoover
f. d. roosevelt
truman
eisenhower
kennedy
l. b. johnson
nixon
ford
carter
reagan
g. h. w. bush
clinton
g. w. bush
obama
trump

 book
 category
 list
 portal

vtecabinet of president franklin d. roosevelt (1933–45)vice president
john n. garner (1933–41)
henry a. wallace (1941–45)
harry s. truman (1945)
secretary of state
cordell hull (1933–44)
edward r. stettinius jr. (1944–45)
secretary of the treasury
william hartman woodin (1933–34)
henry morgenthau jr. (1934–45)
secretary of war
george h. dern (1933–36)
harry h. woodring (1936–40)
henry l. stimson (1940–45)
attorney general
homer s. cummings (1933–39)
frank murphy (1939–40)
robert h. jackson (1940–41)
francis b. biddle (1941–45)
postmaster general
james a. farley (1933–40)
frank c. walker (1940–45)
secretary of the navy
claude a. swanson (1933–39)
charles edison (1940)
frank knox (1940–44)
james v. forrestal (1944–45)
secretary of the interior
harold l. ickes (1933–45)
secretary of agriculture
henry a. wallace (1933–40)
claude raymond wickard (1940–45)
secretary of commerce
daniel c. roper (1933–38)
harry l. hopkins (1938–40)
jesse h. jones (1940–45)
henry a. wallace (1945)
secretary of labor
frances perkins (1933–45)

vte(1916 ←)   1920 united states presidential election   (→ 1924)democratic partyconventionnominee
james m. cox
vp nominee
franklin d. roosevelt
candidates
william gibbs mcadoo
a. mitchell palmer
al smith
john w. davis
edward i. edwards
woodrow wilson
robert latham owen
republican partyconventionnominee
warren g. harding
vp nominee
calvin coolidge
candidates
leonard wood
frank orren lowden
hiram johnson
william cameron sproul
nicholas murray butler
calvin coolidge
robert m. la follette
jeter connelly pritchard
miles poindexter
howard sutherland
herbert hoover
third party and independent candidatessocialist party of americanominee
eugene v. debs
vp nominee
seymour stedman
farmer–labor partynominee
parley p. christensen
vp nominee
max s. hayes
prohibition partynominee
aaron s. watkins
vp nominee
d. leigh colvin
american partynominee
james e. ferguson
vp nominee
william j. hough
socialist labor partynominee
william wesley cox
vp nominee
august gillhaus
single taxnominee
robert colvin macauley
vp nominee
richard c. barnum

other 1920 elections: house
senate

vte(1928 ←)   1932 united states presidential election   (→ 1936)democratic partyconventionnominee
franklin d. roosevelt
vp nominee
john nance garner
candidates
john nance garner
william h. murray
james a. reed
albert ritchie
al smith (campaign)
republican partyconventionnominee
herbert hoover
vp nominee
charles curtis
candidates
john j. blaine
calvin coolidge
joseph i. france
james w. wadsworth
third party and independent candidatescommunist partynominee
william z. foster
vp nominee
james w. ford
prohibition partynominee
william david upshaw
socialist partynominee
norman thomas
vp nominee
james h. maurer
socialist labor partynominee
verne l. reynolds
vp nominee
john w. aiken
independents and other candidates:
james renshaw cox
william hope harvey

other 1932 elections: house
senate

vte(1932 ←)   1936 united states presidential election   (→ 1940)democratic partyconventionnominee
franklin d. roosevelt
vp nominee
john nance garner
candidates
henry s. breckinridge
republican partyconventionnominee
alf landon
vp nominee
frank knox
candidates
william borah
stephen a. day
lester j. dickinson
warren green
frank knox
earl warren
frederick steiwer
third party and independent candidatescommunist partynominee
earl browder
vp nominee
james w. ford
prohibition partynominee
d. leigh colvin
vp nominee
claude a. watson
socialist partynominee
norman thomas
vp nominee
george a. nelson
union partynominee
william lemke
vp nominee
thomas c. o'brien
socialist labor partynominee
john w. aiken
vp nominee
emil f. teichert
christian partynominee
william dudley pelley
vp nominee
willard kemp

other 1936 elections: house
senate

vte(1936 ←)   1940 united states presidential election   (→ 1944)democratic partyconventionnominee
franklin d. roosevelt
vp nominee
henry a. wallace
candidates
james farley
john nance garner
cordell hull
millard tydings
republican partyconventionnominee
wendell willkie
vp nominee
charles l. mcnary
candidates
styles bridges
thomas dewey
frank gannett
arthur james
robert taft
arthur h. vandenberg
third party and independent candidatesprohibition partynominee
roger babson
socialist partynominee
norman thomas
vp nominee
maynard c. krueger
socialist labor partynominee
john w. aiken
vp nominee
aaron m. orange
independents and other candidates
gracie allen

other 1940 elections: house
senate

vte(1940 ←)   1944 united states presidential election   (→ 1948)democratic partyconventionnominee
franklin d. roosevelt
vp nominee
harry truman
candidates
harry f. byrd
james farley
republican partyconventionnominee
thomas e. dewey
vp nominee
john w. bricker
candidates
riley a. bender
everett dirksen
douglas macarthur
harold stassen
robert taft
wendell willkie
third party and independent candidatesamerica first partynominee
gerald l. k. smith
prohibition partynominee
claude a. watson
socialist partynominee
norman thomas
vp nominee
darlington hoopes

other 1944 elections: house
senate

vtegovernors and lieutenant governors of new yorkgovernors
g. clinton
jay
g. clinton
lewis
tompkins
tayler
d. clinton
yates
d. clinton
pitcher
van buren
throop
marcy
seward
bouck
wright
young
fish
hunt
seymour
clark
king
morgan
seymour
fenton
hoffman
j. adams dix
tilden
robinson
cornell
cleveland
hill
flower
morton
black
t. roosevelt
odell
higgins
hughes
white
j. alden dix
sulzer
glynn
whitman
smith
miller
smith
f. roosevelt
lehman
poletti
dewey
harriman
rockefeller
wilson
carey
m. cuomo
pataki
spitzer
paterson
a. cuomo
lieutenantgovernors
van cortlandt
s. van rensselaer
j. van rensselaer
broome
tayler
clinton
tayler
swift
tayler
root
tallmadge
pitcher
p. livingston
dayan
throop
stebbins
oliver
e. livingston
tracy
bradish
dickinson
gardiner
lester
fish
patterson
church
raymond
selden
campbell
floyd-jones
alvord
woodford
beach
robinson
dorsheimer
hoskins
hill
mccarthy
jones
sheehan
saxton
woodruff
higgins
bruce
raines
chanler
white
cobb
conway
glynn
wagner
schoeneck
walker
wood
lusk
lunn
lowman
corning
lehman
bray
poletti
hanley
wallace
hanley
moore
wicks
mahoney
deluca
wilson
anderson
krupsak
cuomo
delbello
anderson
lundine
mccaughey
donohue
paterson
bruno
skelos
smith
espada
ravitch
duffy
hochul

italics indicate acting officeholders

vteunited states department of the navysecretariescabinet level
stoddert
smith
hamilton
jones
crowninshield
s thompson
southard
branch
l. woodbury
dickerson
paulding
badger
upshur
henshaw
gilmer
mason
bancroft
mason
preston
graham
kennedy
dobbin
toucey
welles
borie
robeson
r thompson
goff
hunt
chandler
whitney
tracy
herbert
long
moody
morton
bonaparte
metcalf
newberry
meyer
daniels
denby
wilbur
adams
swanson
edison
knox
forrestal
dept. of defense
sullivan
matthews
kimball
anderson
thomas
t. gates
franke
connally
korth
nitze
ignatius
chafee
warner
middendorf
claytor
hidalgo
lehman
webb
ball
garrett
o'keefe
dalton
danzig
england
winter
mabus
spencer
undersecretaries
forrestal
bard
a. gates
sullivan
kenney
kimball
whitehair
thomas
t. gates
franke
bantz
fay
belieu
baldwin
baird
warner
sanders
middendorf
potter
macdonald
woolsey
murray
goodrich
garrett
howard
danzig
hultin
pirie
livingstone
aviles
work
davidson
modly
assistantsecretariespre–1954
fox
faxon
soley
mcadoo
t. roosevelt sr.
allen
hackett
darling
newberry
satterlee
winthrop
f. roosevelt
g. woodbury
t. roosevelt jr.
robinson
jahncke
h. roosevelt
edison
compton
bard
hensel
kenney
andrews
koehler
askins
fogler
post–1954
financial management and comptroller
installations and environment
manpower and reserve affairs
research, development and acquisitions
general counsel of the navy
defunct:
air
installations and logistics
material
research and development
research, engineering and systems
shipbuilding and logistics

vteunsuccessful major party candidates for vice president of the united states
george clinton (1792)
thomas pinckney (1796)
aaron burr (1796)
charles c. pinckney (1800)
rufus king (1804, 1808)
jared ingersoll (1812)
john e. howard (1816)
nathan sanford (1824)
nathaniel macon (1824)
richard rush (1828)
john sergeant (1832)
francis granger (1836)
john tyler (1836)
richard m. johnson (1840)
theodore frelinghuysen (1844)
william o. butler (1848)
william a. graham (1852)
william l. dayton (1856)
herschel v. johnson (1860)
george h. pendleton (1864)
francis p. blair jr. (1868)
benjamin g. brown (1872)
thomas a. hendricks (1876)
william h. english (1880)
john a. logan (1884)
allen g. thurman (1888)
whitelaw reid (1892)
arthur sewall (1896)
adlai stevenson i (1900)
henry g. davis (1904)
john w. kern (1908)
james s. sherman (1912)
charles w. fairbanks (1916)
franklin d. roosevelt (1920)
charles w. bryan (1924)
joseph t. robinson (1928)
charles curtis (1932)
frank knox (1936)
charles l. mcnary (1940)
john w. bricker (1944)
earl warren (1948)
john sparkman (1952)
estes kefauver (1956)
henry cabot lodge jr. (1960)
william e. miller (1964)
edmund muskie (1968)
sargent shriver (1972)
bob dole (1976)
walter mondale (1980)
geraldine ferraro (1984)
lloyd bentsen (1988)
dan quayle (1992)
jack kemp (1996)
joe lieberman (2000)
john edwards (2004)
sarah palin (2008)
paul ryan (2012)
tim kaine (2016)
 all vice presidential candidates
 vice presidents

vteunited states democratic partychairpersonsof the dnc
hallett
mclane
smalley
belmont
schell
hewitt
barnum
brice
harrity
jones
taggart
mack
mccombs
mccormick
cummings
white
hull
shaver
raskob
farley
flynn
walker
hannegan
mcgrath
boyle
mckinney
mitchell
butler
jackson
bailey
o'brien
harris
o'brien
westwood
strauss
curtis
white
manatt
kirk
brown
wilhelm
delee
dodd/fowler
romer/grossman
rendell/andrew
mcauliffe
dean
kaine
wasserman schultz
perez
presidentialtickets
jackson/calhoun
jackson/van buren
van buren/r. johnson
van buren/none
polk/dallas
cass/butler
pierce/king
buchanan/breckinridge
douglas/h. johnson (breckinridge/lane, sd)
mcclellan/pendleton
seymour/blair
greeley/brown
tilden/hendricks
hancock/english
cleveland/hendricks
cleveland/thurman
cleveland/stevenson i
w. bryan/sewall
w. bryan/stevenson i
parker/h. davis
w. bryan/kern
wilson/marshall (twice)
cox/roosevelt
j. davis/c. bryan
smith/robinson
roosevelt/garner (twice)
roosevelt/wallace
roosevelt/truman
truman/barkley
stevenson ii/sparkman
stevenson ii/kefauver
kennedy/l. johnson
l. johnson/humphrey
humphrey/muskie
mcgovern/(eagleton, shriver)
carter/mondale (twice)
mondale/ferraro
dukakis/bentsen
b. clinton/gore (twice)
gore/lieberman
kerry/edwards
obama/biden (twice)
h. clinton/kaine
state andterritorialparties
alabama
alaska
arizona
arkansas
california
colorado
connecticut
delaware
florida
georgia
hawaii
idaho
illinois
indiana
iowa
kansas
kentucky
louisiana
maine
maryland
massachusetts
michigan
minnesota
mississippi
missouri
montana
nebraska
nevada
new hampshire
new jersey
new mexico
new york
north carolina
north dakota
ohio
oklahoma
oregon
pennsylvania
rhode island
south carolina
south dakota
tennessee
texas
utah
vermont
virginia
washington
west virginia
wisconsin
wyoming
district of columbia
guam
puerto rico
conventions(list)
1832 (baltimore)
1835 (baltimore)
1840 (baltimore)
1844 (baltimore)
1848 (baltimore)
1852 (baltimore)
1856 (cincinnati)
1860 (baltimore)
1864 (chicago)
1868 (new york)
1872 (baltimore)
1876 (saint louis)
1880 (cincinnati)
1884 (chicago)
1888 (saint louis)
1892 (chicago)
1896 (chicago)
1900 (kansas city)
1904 (saint louis)
1908 (denver)
1912 (baltimore)
1916 (saint louis)
1920 (san francisco)
1924 (new york)
1928 (houston)
1932 (chicago)
1936 (philadelphia)
1940 (chicago)
1944 (chicago)
1948 (philadelphia)
1952 (chicago)
1956 (chicago)
1960 (los angeles)
1964 (atlantic city)
1968 (chicago)
1972 (miami beach)
1976 (new york)
1980 (new york)
1984 (san francisco)
1988 (atlanta)
1992 (new york)
1996 (chicago)
2000 (los angeles)
2004 (boston)
2008 (denver)
2012 (charlotte)
2016 (philadelphia)
2020 (tba)
affiliatedgroupscongress
senate caucus
policy committee
steering and outreach committee
united states senate democratic conference secretary
house caucus
fundraising
democratic congressional campaign committee
democratic governors association
democratic legislative campaign committee
democratic senatorial campaign committee
national conference of democratic mayors
sectional
college democrats of america
democrats abroad
national federation of democratic women
stonewall democrats
stonewall young democrats
young democrats of america
high school democrats of america
relatedarticles
history
primaries
debates
party factions
superdelegate
2005 chairmanship election
2017 chairmanship election
2006 house caucus leadership election
2018 house caucus leadership election
weekly democratic address

 portal

vtenew york state democratic committeechairpersons
schell
fowler
bingham
richmond
tilden
beach
magone
purcell
faulkner
manning
o'brien
walker
murphy
hinckley
danforth
campbell
meyer
conners
dix
huppuch
mack
palmer
osborn
harris
kellogg
farley
pell
corning
bray
farley
fitzpatrick
lynch
balch
prendergrast
mckeon
burns
crangle
cunningham
baranello
hennessy
kirwan
marino
gordon
hope
farrell
o'neill
jacobs
wright
brown
gubernatorial tickets
smith/fitts (1920)
smith/lunn (1922, 1924)
smith/corning 1st (1926)
roosevelt/lehman (1928, 1930)
lehman/bray (1932, 1934, 1936)
lehman/poletti (1938)
bennett/poletti (1942)
mead/corning 2nd (1946)
lynch/balch (1950)
harriman/deluca (1956, 1958)
morgenthau/burns (1962)
o'connor/samuels (1966)
goldberg/paterson (1970)
carey/krupsak (1974)
carey/m. cuomo (1978)
m. cuomo/delbello (1982)
m. cuomo/lundine (1986, 1990, 1994)
vallone/frankel (1998)
mccall/mehiel (2002)
spitzer/paterson (2006)
a. cuomo/duffy (2010)
a. cuomo/hochul (2014)

vtetime persons of the year1927–1950
charles lindbergh (1927)
walter chrysler (1928)
owen d. young (1929)
mohandas gandhi (1930)
pierre laval (1931)
franklin d. roosevelt (1932)
hugh s. johnson (1933)
franklin d. roosevelt (1934)
haile selassie (1935)
wallis simpson (1936)
chiang kai-shek / soong mei-ling (1937)
adolf hitler (1938)
joseph stalin (1939)
winston churchill (1940)
franklin d. roosevelt (1941)
joseph stalin (1942)
george marshall (1943)
dwight d. eisenhower (1944)
harry s. truman (1945)
james f. byrnes (1946)
george marshall (1947)
harry s. truman (1948)
winston churchill (1949)
the american fighting-man (1950)
1951–1975
mohammed mosaddeq (1951)
elizabeth ii  (1952)
konrad adenauer (1953)
john foster dulles (1954)
harlow curtice (1955)
hungarian freedom fighters (1956)
nikita khrushchev (1957)
charles de gaulle (1958)
dwight d. eisenhower (1959)
 u.s. scientists: george beadle / charles draper / john enders / donald a. glaser / joshua lederberg / willard libby / linus pauling / edward purcell / isidor rabi / emilio segrè / william shockley / edward teller / charles townes / james van allen / robert woodward  (1960)
john f. kennedy (1961)
pope john xxiii (1962)
martin luther king jr. (1963)
lyndon b. johnson (1964)
william westmoreland (1965)
the generation twenty-five and under (1966)
lyndon b. johnson (1967)
 the apollo 8 astronauts: william anders / frank borman / jim lovell  (1968)
the middle americans (1969)
willy brandt (1970)
richard nixon (1971)
henry kissinger / richard nixon (1972)
john sirica (1973)
king faisal (1974)
 american women: susan brownmiller / kathleen byerly / alison cheek / jill conway / betty ford / ella grasso / carla hills / barbara jordan / billie jean king / susie sharp / carol sutton / addie wyatt  (1975)
1976–2000
jimmy carter (1976)
anwar sadat (1977)
deng xiaoping (1978)
ayatollah khomeini (1979)
ronald reagan (1980)
lech wałęsa (1981)
the computer (1982)
ronald reagan / yuri andropov (1983)
peter ueberroth (1984)
deng xiaoping (1985)
corazon aquino (1986)
mikhail gorbachev (1987)
the endangered earth (1988)
mikhail gorbachev (1989)
george h. w. bush (1990)
ted turner (1991)
bill clinton (1992)
 the peacemakers: yasser arafat / f. w. de klerk / nelson mandela / yitzhak rabin  (1993)
pope john paul ii (1994)
newt gingrich (1995)
david ho (1996)
andrew grove (1997)
bill clinton / ken starr (1998)
jeff bezos (1999)
george w. bush (2000)
2001–present
rudolph giuliani (2001)
 the whistleblowers: cynthia cooper / coleen rowley / sherron watkins  (2002)
the american soldier (2003)
george w. bush (2004)
 the good samaritans: bono / bill gates / melinda gates  (2005)
you (2006)
vladimir putin (2007)
barack obama (2008)
ben bernanke (2009)
mark zuckerberg (2010)
the protester (2011)
barack obama (2012)
pope francis (2013)
 ebola fighters: dr. jerry brown / dr. kent brantly /  ella watson-stryker / foday gollah / salome karwah  (2014)
angela merkel (2015)
donald trump (2016)
the silence breakers (2017)
 the guardians: jamal khashoggi / maria ressa / wa lone and kyaw soe oo / staff of the capital  (2018)
 book
vte hall of fame for great americans 
john adams
john quincy adams
jane addams
louis agassiz
susan b. anthony
john james audubon
george bancroft
clara barton
henry ward beecher
alexander graham bell
daniel boone
edwin booth
louis brandeis
phillips brooks
william cullen bryant
luther burbank
andrew carnegie
george washington carver
william ellery channing
rufus choate
henry clay
grover cleveland
james fenimore cooper
peter cooper
charlotte cushman
james buchanan eads
thomas alva edison
jonathan edwards
ralph waldo emerson
david farragut
stephen foster
benjamin franklin
robert fulton
josiah w. gibbs
william c. gorgas
ulysses s. grant
asa gray
alexander hamilton
nathaniel hawthorne
joseph henry
patrick henry
oliver wendell holmes sr.
oliver wendell holmes jr.
mark hopkins
elias howe
washington irving
andrew jackson
thomas j. jackson
thomas jefferson
john paul jones
james kent
sidney lanier
robert e. lee
abraham lincoln
henry wadsworth longfellow
james russell lowell
mary lyon
edward macdowell
james madison
horace mann
john marshall
matthew fontaine maury
albert a. michelson
maria mitchell
james monroe
samuel f. b. morse
william t. g. morton
john lothrop motley
simon newcomb
thomas paine
alice freeman palmer
francis parkman
george peabody
william penn
edgar allan poe
walter reed
franklin d. roosevelt
theodore roosevelt
augustus saint-gaudens
william tecumseh sherman
john philip sousa
joseph story
harriet beecher stowe
gilbert stuart
sylvanus thayer
henry david thoreau
mark twain
lillian wald
booker t. washington
george washington
daniel webster
george westinghouse
james mcneill whistler
walt whitman
eli whitney
john greenleaf whittier
emma willard
frances e. willard
roger williams
woodrow wilson
orville wright
wilbur wright

 portal

vte    philippine legion of honor recipients    chief commander(punong komandante)
emilio aguinaldo
hassanal bolkiah
chiang kai-shek
dwight d. eisenhower
leonardo espina
francisco franco
josé p. laurel
douglas macarthur
ferdinand marcos
imelda marcos
sergio osmeña
jesse robredo
chino roces
franklin d. roosevelt
jaime sin
achmad sukarno
lorenzo tañada
maxwell d. taylor
claudio teehankee
grand commander(marangal na komandante)
gilbert teodoro
emilio yap
fernando zóbel de ayala
jaime zóbel de ayala
jaime augusto zóbel de ayala ii
grand officer(marangal na pinuno)
teodoro locsin jr.
commander (komandante)
benigno aquino jr.
eulogio balao
alfredo montelibano sr.
officer (pinuno)
benigno aquino jr.
manny pacquiao
legionnaire(lehiyonaryo)
escuadrón 201
teddy boy locsin
edith nourse rogers
richard sakakida

biography portal1930s portal1940s portalgovernment of the united states portalliberalism portalmilitary of the united states portalnew york portalpolitics portallaw portalradio portalworld war ii portalunited states portal
authority control 
bibsys: 90091129
bne: xx1097389
bnf: cb119835923 (data)
gnd: 118602551
isni: 0000 0001 2125 8471
kulturnav: 0ffc23db-93c3-4732-b46f-bf0cd2a7f103
lccn: n79022932
musicbrainz: afac40dc-7788-4da7-9229-61d660e77dd3
nara: 10582816
ndl: 00454601
nkc: jn20000701525
nla: 35461123
selibr: 234747
snac: w6pc30cw
sudoc: 027345106
ulan: 500354971
viaf: 29542759
 worldcat identities (via viaf): 29542759




 
						retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=franklin_d._roosevelt&oldid=883677882"					
categories: 1882 births1945 deaths20th-century american politicians20th-century presidents of the united statesamerican anti-fascistsamerican odd fellowsamerican people in the venona papersamerican philatelic societyamerican philatelistsamerican politicians with physical disabilitiesamerican social democratsanti-imperialismburials in new york (state)columbia law school alumnidelano familydemocratic party (united states) vice presidential nomineesdemocratic party presidents of the united statesdemocratic party state governors of the united statesdutchess county, new york politicianseleanor rooseveltfranklin d. rooseveltfreemason united states presidentsfreemen of the city of londongovernors of new york (state)groton school alumnihall of fame for great americans inducteesharvard college alumniharvard crimson alumniknights grand cross of the military order of williamnew york (state) democratsnew york (state) lawyersnew york state senatorsnew dealpeople from hyde park, new yorkpoliticians with paraplegiapresidents of the united statespresidents of the united states who died while in officeroosevelt familysons of the american revolutionliberalism in the united states1932 united states presidential candidates1936 united states presidential candidates1940 united states presidential candidates1944 united states presidential candidatesunited states assistant secretaries of the navy1920 united states vice-presidential candidatesworld war ii political leadersroosevelt institutehidden categories: articles with short descriptionwikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesgood articlesuse american english from october 2017all wikipedia articles written in american englishuse mdy dates from february 2019pages using sidebar with the child parameterarticles with haudio microformatscs1: long volume valuearticles with curlie linksarticles with project gutenberg linksarticles with librivox linksarticles with internet archive linkswikipedia articles with bibsys identifierswikipedia articles with bne identifierswikipedia articles with bnf identifierswikipedia articles with gnd identifierswikipedia articles with isni identifierswikipedia articles with kulturnav identifierswikipedia articles with lccn identifierswikipedia articles with musicbrainz identifierswikipedia articles with nara identifierswikipedia articles with ndl identifierswikipedia articles with nkc identifierswikipedia articles with nla identifierswikipedia articles with selibr identifierswikipedia articles with snac-id identifierswikipedia articles with sudoc identifierswikipedia articles with ulan identifierswikipedia articles with viaf identifierswikipedia articles with worldcat-viaf identifiersac with 17 elementsarticles containing video clips 



navigation menu


personal tools

not logged intalkcontributionscreate accountlog in 



namespaces

articletalk 




variants







views

readview sourceview history 



more





search



 







navigation


main pagecontentsfeatured contentcurrent eventsrandom articledonate to wikipediawikipedia store 



interaction


helpabout wikipediacommunity portalrecent changescontact page 



tools


what links hererelated changesupload filespecial pagespermanent linkpage informationwikidata itemcite this page 



print/export


create a bookdownload as pdfprintable version 



in other projects


wikimedia commonswikiquotewikisource 



languages


адыгэбзэafrikaansalemannischአማርኛالعربيةaragonésasturianuaymar aruazərbaycancaتۆرکجهবাংলাbân-lâm-gúбашҡортсабеларускаябеларуская (тарашкевіца)‎bikol centralbislamaбългарскиbosanskibrezhonegбуряадcatalàчӑвашлаcebuanočeštinachi-chewacorsucymraegdanskdeutscheestiελληνικάespañolesperantoeuskaraفارسیfiji hindiføroysktfrançaisfryskgaeilgegaelggàidhliggalego客家語/hak-kâ-ngî한국어հայերենहिन्दीhornjoserbscehrvatskiidoilokanobahasa indonesiainterlinguaíslenskaitalianoעבריתbasa jawaಕನ್ನಡkapampanganქართულიқазақшаkernowekkinyarwandakiswahilikurdîкыргызчаlatinalatviešulëtzebuergeschlietuviųlimburgslingálalingua franca novalumbaartmagyarमैथिलीмакедонскиmalagasyമലയാളംमराठीმარგალურიمصرىمازِرونیbahasa melayumìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄монголမြန်မာဘာသာdorerin naoeronederlandsनेपालीनेपाल भाषा日本語нохчийнnordfriisknorsknorsk nynorskoccitanଓଡ଼ିଆoʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀپنجابیpiemontèisplattdüütschpolskiportuguêsromânărumantschruna simiрусиньскыйрусскийсаха тылаᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤसंस्कृतम्scotsshqipsicilianusimple englishslovenčinaslovenščinaکوردیсрпски / srpskisrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиbasa sundasuomisvenskatagalogதமிழ்татарча/tatarçaతెలుగుไทยtürkçeукраїнськаاردوئۇيغۇرچە / uyghurchevepsän kel’tiếng việtvõrowinaray吴语ייִדישyorùbá粵語zeêuwsžemaitėška中文 
edit links 





 this page was last edited on 16 february 2019, at 22:11 (utc).
text is available under the creative commons attribution-sharealike license;
additional terms may apply.  by using this site, you agree to the terms of use and privacy policy. wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the wikimedia foundation, inc., a non-profit organization.


privacy policy
about wikipedia
disclaimers
contact wikipedia
developers
cookie statement
mobile view



 

 



(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgpageparsereport":{"limitreport":{"cputime":"4.064","walltime":"4.748","ppvisitednodes":{"value":32978,"limit":1000000},"ppgeneratednodes":{"value":0,"limit":1500000},"postexpandincludesize":{"value":1157967,"limit":2097152},"templateargumentsize":{"value":296190,"limit":2097152},"expansiondepth":{"value":21,"limit":40},"expensivefunctioncount":{"value":49,"limit":500},"unstrip-depth":{"value":1,"limit":20},"unstrip-size":{"value":501547,"limit":5000000},"entityaccesscount":{"value":7,"limit":400},"timingprofile":["100.00% 3418.145      1 -total"," 19.45%  664.784      2 template:reflist"," 16.14%  551.856    302 template:sfn"," 12.37%  422.961     10 template:infobox"," 12.27%  419.468      1 template:infobox_officeholder"," 11.30%  386.286      2 template:navboxes"," 10.83%  370.261     58 template:citation"," 10.17%  347.497     57 template:navbox","  8.46%  289.161     55 template:cite_book","  4.46%  152.581     17 template:infobox_officeholder/office"]},"scribunto":{"limitreport-timeusage":{"value":"1.954","limit":"10.000"},"limitreport-memusage":{"value":14840626,"limit":52428800},"limitreport-logs":"3\n3\n"},"cachereport":{"origin":"mw1267","timestamp":"20190219095634","ttl":86400,"transientcontent":true}}});});
{"@context":"https:\/\/schema.org","@type":"article","name":"franklin d. roosevelt","url":"https:\/\/en.wikipedia.org\/wiki\/franklin_d._roosevelt","sameas":"http:\/\/www.wikidata.org\/entity\/q8007","mainentity":"http:\/\/www.wikidata.org\/entity\/q8007","author":{"@type":"organization","name":"contributors to wikimedia projects"},"publisher":{"@type":"organization","name":"wikimedia foundation, inc.","logo":{"@type":"imageobject","url":"https:\/\/www.wikimedia.org\/static\/images\/wmf-hor-googpub.png"}},"datepublished":"2001-09-20t21:40:44z","datemodified":"2019-02-16t22:11:27z","image":"https:\/\/upload.wikimedia.org\/wikipedia\/commons\/4\/42\/fdr_1944_color_portrait.jpg","headline":"32nd president of the united states"}
(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgbackendresponsetime":148,"wghostname":"mw1273"});});


