



united states air force - wikipedia
document.documentelement.classname = document.documentelement.classname.replace( /(^|\s)client-nojs(\s|$)/, "$1client-js$2" );
(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgcanonicalnamespace":"","wgcanonicalspecialpagename":false,"wgnamespacenumber":0,"wgpagename":"united_states_air_force","wgtitle":"united states air force","wgcurrevisionid":882939783,"wgrevisionid":882939783,"wgarticleid":32090,"wgisarticle":true,"wgisredirect":false,"wgaction":"view","wgusername":null,"wgusergroups":["*"],"wgcategories":["webarchive template wayback links","cs1 maint: archived copy as title","all articles with dead external links","articles with dead external links from august 2017","articles with short description","articles with haudio microformats","articles containing potentially dated statements from 2017","all articles containing potentially dated statements","articles needing additional references from january 2018","all articles needing additional references","articles with internet archive links","wikipedia articles with bnf identifiers","wikipedia articles with gnd identifiers","wikipedia articles with isni identifiers","wikipedia articles with lccn identifiers","wikipedia articles with nkc identifiers","wikipedia articles with selibr identifiers","wikipedia articles with sudoc identifiers","wikipedia articles with viaf identifiers","wikipedia articles with worldcat-viaf identifiers","use dmy dates from july 2018","military units and formations established in 1947","the pentagon","uniformed services of the united states","united states air force","united states department of defense","1947 establishments in the united states","collier trophy recipients","united states armed forces service branches"],"wgbreakframes":false,"wgpagecontentlanguage":"en","wgpagecontentmodel":"wikitext","wgseparatortransformtable":["",""],"wgdigittransformtable":["",""],"wgdefaultdateformat":"dmy","wgmonthnames":["","january","february","march","april","may","june","july","august","september","october","november","december"],"wgmonthnamesshort":["","jan","feb","mar","apr","may","jun","jul","aug","sep","oct","nov","dec"],"wgrelevantpagename":"united_states_air_force","wgrelevantarticleid":32090,"wgrequestid":"xgy2kapaic4aah25nz4aaaad","wgcspnonce":false,"wgisprobablyeditable":true,"wgrelevantpageisprobablyeditable":true,"wgrestrictionedit":[],"wgrestrictionmove":[],"wgflaggedrevsparams":{"tags":{}},"wgstablerevisionid":null,"wgcategorytreepagecategoryoptions":"{\"mode\":0,\"hideprefix\":20,\"showcount\":true,\"namespaces\":false}","wgwikieditorenabledmodules":[],"wgbetafeaturesfeatures":[],"wgmediavieweronclick":true,"wgmediaviewerenabledbydefault":true,"wgpopupsshouldsendmoduletouser":true,"wgpopupsconflictswithnavpopupgadget":false,"wgvisualeditor":{"pagelanguagecode":"en","pagelanguagedir":"ltr","pagevariantfallbacks":"en","usepageimages":true,"usepagedescriptions":true},"wgmfispagecontentmodeleditable":true,"wgmfenablefontchanger":true,"wgmfdisplaywikibasedescriptions":{"search":true,"nearby":true,"watchlist":true,"tagline":false},"wgrelatedarticles":null,"wgrelatedarticlesusecirrussearch":true,"wgrelatedarticlesonlyusecirrussearch":false,"wgwmeschemaeditattemptstepoversample":false,"wgpoweredbyhhvm":true,"wgulscurrentautonym":"english","wgnoticeproject":"wikipedia","wgcentralnoticecookiestodelete":[],"wgcentralnoticecategoriesusinglegacy":["fundraising","fundraising"],"wgwikibaseitemid":"q11223","wgscorenotelanguages":{"arabic":"العربية","catalan":"català","deutsch":"deutsch","english":"english","espanol":"español","italiano":"italiano","nederlands":"nederlands","norsk":"norsk","portugues":"português","suomi":"suomi","svenska":"svenska","vlaams":"west-vlams"},"wgscoredefaultnotelanguage":"nederlands","wgcentralauthmobiledomain":false,"wgcodemirrorenabled":true,"wgvisualeditortoolbarscrolloffset":0,"wgvisualeditorunsupportededitparams":["undo","undoafter","veswitched"],"wgeditsubmitbuttonlabelpublish":true,"oreswikiid":"enwiki","oresbaseurl":"http://ores.discovery.wmnet:8081/","oresapiversion":3});mw.loader.state({"ext.gadget.charinsert-styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site.styles":"ready","site.styles":"ready","noscript":"ready","user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site":"ready","user":"ready","user.options":"ready","user.tokens":"loading","ext.cite.styles":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.shared":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.commonprint":"ready","mediawiki.toc.styles":"ready","wikibase.client.init":"ready","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.noscript":"ready","ext.uls.interlanguage":"ready","ext.wikimediabadges":"ready","ext.3d.styles":"ready","mediawiki.skinning.interface":"ready","skins.vector.styles":"ready"});mw.loader.implement("user.tokens@0tffind",function($,jquery,require,module){/*@nomin*/mw.user.tokens.set({"edittoken":"+\\","patroltoken":"+\\","watchtoken":"+\\","csrftoken":"+\\"});
});rlpagemodules=["ext.cite.ux-enhancements","site","mediawiki.page.startup","mediawiki.page.ready","mediawiki.toc","mediawiki.searchsuggest","ext.gadget.teahouse","ext.gadget.referencetooltips","ext.gadget.watchlist-notice","ext.gadget.drn-wizard","ext.gadget.charinsert","ext.gadget.reftoolbar","ext.gadget.extra-toolbar-buttons","ext.gadget.switcher","ext.centralauth.centralautologin","mmv.head","mmv.bootstrap.autostart","ext.popups","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.init","ext.visualeditor.targetloader","ext.eventlogging","ext.wikimediaevents","ext.navigationtiming","ext.uls.eventlogger","ext.uls.init","ext.uls.compactlinks","ext.uls.interface","ext.quicksurveys.init","ext.centralnotice.geoip","ext.centralnotice.startup","skins.vector.js"];mw.loader.load(rlpagemodules);});























 





united states air force 
from wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 jump to navigation
jump to search
air and space warfare branch of the united states armed forces
"usaf" redirects here. for other uses, see usaf (disambiguation).
"the u.s. air force" redirects here. for the song, see the u.s. air force (song).
united states air forceemblem of the united states air force[1]founded1 august 1907 (111 years, 6 months) (first antecedent)18 september 1947 (71 years, 4 months) (as independent service)country united states of americatypeair and space force[2]roleair, space, and cyberspace warfaresize321,444 active duty airmen141,880 civilians[3] 69,200 reserve airmen[4] 105,700 air national guard airmen[5] 5,047 manned aircraft[6] 406 icbms[7] 170 satellites[8]part ofdepartment of defense
department of the air force
headquartersthe pentagon arlington county, virginia, u.s.motto(s)"aim high ... fly-fight-win"[9]"integrity first, service before self, excellence in all we do"[10]colorsultramarine blue, golden yellow[11]         marchthe u.s. air force play (help·info)anniversaries18 septemberengagements
see list
mexican expedition (as aviation section, u.s. signal corps)world war i (as aviation section, u.s. signal corps and army air service) world war ii (as usaaf)korean warlebanon crisissecond taiwan strait crisisquemoy and matsu islandsvietnam assistancecongo crisisberlin crisisvietnam warlaotian civil warcuban missile crisiscongo – operation dragon rougedominican civil war – operation power packkorean dmz conflictcambodian campaigncommunist insurgency in thailandcambodia – operation eagle pullvietnam – operation frequent windmayaguez operationgrenada – operation urgent furylebanese civil warpersian gulf – operation earnest willlibya – operation el dorado canyonpanama – operation just causesouthwest asia conflictsomali civil warhaiti – operation uphold democracy kosovo campaignafghanistan campaignglobal war on terrorismiraq campaignoperation inherent resolve[12]

websitewww.af.milwww.airforce.comcommanderscommander-in-chiefpresident donald trumpsecretary of defensepatrick m. shanahan (acting)secretary of the air forceheather wilsonchief of staffgen david l. goldfeinvice chief of staffgen stephen w. wilsonchief master sergeant of the air forcecmsaf kaleth o. wrightinsigniaflagseal of the department of the air forceroundelusaf "hap" arnold symbolsymbolaircraft flownattacka-10, ac-130, mq-9bomberb-1b, b-2, b-52helectronicwarfaree-3, e-8, ec-130fighterf-15c, f-15e, f-16, f-22, f-35ahelicopterhh-60, uh-1nreconnaissancemc-12, rc-135, rq-4, rq-170, u-2, u-28trainert-1, t-6, t-38, t-41, t-51, t-53, tg-16transportc-5m, c-12, c-17, c-21, c-32, c-37, c-130, c-40, cv-22, vc-25tankerkc-10, kc-135
the united states air force (usaf) is the aerial and space warfare service branch of the united states armed forces. it is one of the five branches of the united states armed forces, and one of the seven american uniformed services. initially formed as a part of the united states army on 1 august 1907, the usaf was established as a separate branch of the u.s. armed forces on 18 september 1947 with the passing of the national security act of 1947. it is the youngest branch of the u.s. armed forces, and the fourth in order of precedence. the usaf is the largest[13] and most technologically advanced[14] air force in the world.  the air force articulates its core missions as air and space superiority, global integrated intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance, rapid global mobility, global strike, and command and control.
the u.s. air force is a military service branch organized within the department of the air force, one of the three military departments of the department of defense. the air force, through the department of the air force, is headed by the civilian secretary of the air force, who reports to the secretary of defense, and is appointed by the president with senate confirmation. the highest-ranking military officer in the air force is the chief of staff of the air force, who exercises supervision over air force units and serves as one of the joint chiefs of staff. air force components are assigned, as directed by the secretary of defense, to the combatant commands, and neither the secretary of the air force nor the chief of staff of the air force have operational command authority over them.
along with conducting independent air and space operations, the u.s. air force provides air support for land and naval forces and aids in the recovery of troops in the field. as of  2017[update], the service operates more than 5,369 military aircraft, 406 icbms and 170 military satellites. it has a $161 billion budget and is the second largest service branch, with 318,415 active duty airmen, 140,169 civilian personnel, 69,200 reserve airmen, and 105,700 air national guard airmen.

contents

1 mission, vision, and functions

1.1 missions
1.2 vision
1.3 core missions

1.3.1 air and space superiority
1.3.2 global integrated isr
1.3.3 rapid global mobility
1.3.4 global strike
1.3.5 command and control




2 history

2.1 antecedents
2.2 21st century
2.3 conflicts
2.4 humanitarian operations


3 organization

3.1 administrative organization
3.2 air force structure and organization
3.3 operational organization

3.3.1 air and space expeditionary task force
3.3.2 commander, air force forces
3.3.3 air operations center
3.3.4 air expeditionary wings/groups/squadrons




4 personnel

4.1 commissioned officers
4.2 warrant officers
4.3 enlisted airmen
4.4 uniforms
4.5 awards and badges
4.6 training

4.6.1 air force fitness test




5 aircraft inventory

5.1 a – attack
5.2 b – bombers
5.3 c – transport
5.4 e – special electronic
5.5 f – fighter
5.6 h – search and rescue
5.7 k – tanker
5.8 m – multi-mission
5.9 o – observation
5.10 r – reconnaissance
5.11 t – trainer
5.12 tg – trainer gliders
5.13 u – utility
5.14 v – vip staff transport
5.15 w – weather reconnaissance
5.16 undesignated foreign aircraft
5.17 lgm – ballistic missile


6 culture
7 see also
8 references
9 external links


mission, vision, and functions[edit]
missions[edit]
according to the national security act of 1947 (61 stat. 502), which created the usaf:


in general the united states air force shall include aviation forces both combat and service not otherwise assigned. it shall be organized, trained, and equipped primarily for prompt and sustained offensive and defensive air operations. the air force shall be responsible for the preparation of the air forces necessary for the effective prosecution of war except as otherwise assigned and, in accordance with integrated joint mobilization plans, for the expansion of the peacetime components of the air force to meet the needs of war.

§8062 of title 10 us code defines the purpose of the usaf as:[15]

to preserve the peace and security, and provide for the defense, of the united states, the territories, commonwealths, and possessions, and any areas occupied by the united states;
to support national policy;
to implement national objectives;
to overcome any nations responsible for aggressive acts that imperil the peace and security of the united states.
the stated mission of the usaf today is to "fly, fight, and win...in air, space, and cyberspace".[16]

vision[edit]
"the united states air force will be a trusted and reliable joint partner with our sister services known for integrity in all of our activities, including supporting the joint mission first and foremost. we will provide compelling air, space, and cyber capabilities for use by the combatant commanders. we will excel as stewards of all air force resources in service to the american people, while providing precise and reliable global vigilance, reach and power for the nation".[17]

core missions[edit]
the five core missions of the air force have not changed dramatically since the air force became independent in 1947, but they have evolved, and are now articulated as air and space superiority, global integrated intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance, rapid global mobility, global strike, and command and control. the purpose of all of these core missions is to provide, what the air force states as, global vigilance, global reach, and global power.[18]

air and space superiority[edit]
main articles: air supremacy and space warfare
air superiority is "that degree of dominance in the air battle of one force over another which permits the conduct of operations by the former and its related land, sea, air, and special operations forces at a given time and place without prohibitive interference by the opposing force" (jp 1-02).[19]

 first f-35 lightning ii of the 33rd fighter wing arrives at eglin afb
offensive counterair (oca) is defined as "offensive operations to destroy, disrupt, or neutralize enemy aircraft, missiles, launch platforms, and their supporting structures and systems both before and after launch, but as close to their source as possible" (jp 1-02). oca is the preferred method of countering air and missile threats since it attempts to defeat the enemy closer to its source and typically enjoys the initiative. oca comprises attack operations, sweep, escort, and suppression/destruction of enemy air defense.[19]
defensive counter air (dca) is defined as "all the defensive measures designed to detect, identify, intercept, and destroy or negate enemy forces attempting to penetrate or attack through friendly airspace" (jp 1-02). a major goal of dca operations, in concert with oca operations, is to provide an area from which forces can operate, secure from air and missile threats. the dca mission comprises both active and passive defense measures. active defense is "the employment of limited offensive action and counterattacks to deny a contested area or position to the enemy" (jp 1-02). it includes both ballistic missile defense and air breathing threat defense, and encompasses point defense, area defense, and high-value airborne asset defense. passive defense is "measures taken to reduce the probability of and to minimize the effects of damage caused by hostile action without the intention of taking the initiative" (jp 1-02). it includes detection and warning; chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear defense; camouflage, concealment, and deception; hardening; reconstitution; dispersion; redundancy; and mobility, counter-measures, and stealth.[19]
airspace control is "a process used to increase operational effectiveness by promoting the safe, efficient, and flexible use of airspace" (jp 1-02). it promotes the safe, efficient, and flexible use of airspace, mitigates the risk of fratricide, enhances both offensive and defensive operations, and permits greater agility of air operations as a whole. it both deconflicts and facilitates integration of joint air operations.[19]

 launch of an air force delta iv heavy rocket carrying a dsp-23 early warning satellite
space superiority is "the degree of dominance in space of one force over another that permits the conduct of operations by the former and its related land, sea, air, space, and special operations forces at a given time and place without prohibitive interference by the opposing force" (jp 1-02). space superiority may be localized in time and space, or it may be broad and enduring. space superiority provides freedom of action in space for friendly forces and, when directed, denies the same freedom to the adversary.[19]
space force enhancement is defined as the "combat support operations and force-multiplying capabilities delivered from space systems to improve the effectiveness of military forces as well as support other intelligence, civil, and commercial users. this mission area includes: intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance; integrated tactical warning and attack assessment; command, control, and communications; positioning, navigation, and timing; and environmental monitoring" (jp 1-02).[19]
space force application is defined as "combat operations in, through, and from space to influence the course and outcome of conflict. this mission area includes ballistic missile defense and force projection" (jp 1-02).[19]
space control is defined as "operations to ensure freedom of action in space for the us and its allies and, when directed, deny an adversary freedom of action in space. this mission area includes: operations conducted to protect friendly space capabilities from attack, interference, or unintentional hazards (defensive space control); operations to deny an adversary's use of space capabilities (offensive space control); and the requisite current and predictive knowledge of the space environment and the operational environment upon which space operations depend (space situational awareness)" (jp 1-02).[19]
space support is defined as "operations to deploy and sustain military and intelligence systems in space. this mission area includes: launching and deploying space vehicles; maintaining and sustaining spacecraft on-orbit, rendezvous and proximity operations; disposing of (including de-orbiting and recovering) space capabilities; and reconstitution of space forces, if required" (jp 1-02).[19]
the u.s. air force currently handles 90% of all military space operations through air force space command and has been designated the primary service for space. 70% of all satellites currently in orbit belong to and are operated by the air force.[20][21][22]

global integrated isr[edit]
main article: intelligence, surveillance, target acquisition, and reconnaissance
global integrated intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (isr) is the synchronization and integration of the planning and operation of sensors, assets, and processing, exploitation, dissemination systems across the globe to conduct current and future operations.[19]

 an air force rq-4 strategic reconnaissance aircraft
planning and directing is "the determination of intelligence requirements, development of appropriate intelligence architecture, preparation of a collection plan, and issuance of orders and requests to information collection agencies" (jp 2-01, joint and national intelligence support to military operations). these activities enable the synchronization and integration of collection, processing, exploitation, analysis, and dissemination activities/resources to meet information requirements of national and military decision makers.[19]
collection is "the acquisition of information and the provision of this information to processing elements" (jp 2-01). it provides the ability to obtain required information to satisfy intelligence needs (via use of sources and methods in all domains). collection activities span the range of military operations (romo).[19]
processing and exploitation is "the conversion of collected information into forms suitable to the production of intelligence" (jp 2-01). it provides the ability, across the romo, to transform, extract, and make available collected information suitable for further analysis or action.[19]
analysis and production is "the conversion of processed information into intelligence through the integration, evaluation, analysis, and interpretation of all source data and the preparation of intelligence products in support of known or anticipated user requirements" (jp 2-01). it provides the ability to integrate, evaluate, and interpret information from available sources to create a finished intelligence product for presentation or dissemination to enable increased situational awareness.[19]
dissemination and integration is "the delivery of intelligence to users in a suitable form and the application of the intelligence to appropriate missions, tasks, and functions" (jp 2-01). it provides the ability to present information and intelligence products across the romo enabling understanding of the operational environment to military and national decision makers.[19]

rapid global mobility[edit]
main articles: airlift and aerial refueling
 an air force kc-46 pegasus refuels a c-17a globemaster iii
rapid global mobility is the timely deployment, employment, sustainment, augmentation, and redeployment of military forces and capabilities across the romo. it provides joint military forces the capability to move from place to place while retaining the ability to fulfill their primary mission. rapid global mobility is essential to virtually every military operation, allowing forces to reach foreign or domestic destinations quickly, thus seizing the initiative through speed and surprise.[19]
airlift is "operations to transport and deliver forces and materiel through the air in support of strategic, operational, or tactical objectives" (annex 3–17, air mobility operations). the rapid and flexible options afforded by airlift allow military forces and national leaders the ability to respond and operate in a variety of situations and time frames. the global reach capability of airlift provides the ability to apply us power worldwide by delivering forces to crisis locations. it serves as a us presence that demonstrates resolve and compassion in humanitarian crisis.[19]
air refueling is "the refueling of an aircraft in flight by another aircraft" (jp 1-02). air refueling extends presence, increases range, and serves as a force multiplier. it allows air assets to more rapidly reach any trouble spot around the world with less dependence on forward staging bases or overflight/landing clearances. air refueling significantly expands the options available to a commander by increasing the range, payload, persistence, and flexibility of receiver aircraft.[19]
aeromedical evacuation is "the movement of patients under medical supervision to and between medical treatment facilities by air transportation" (jp 1-02). jp 4-02, health service support, further defines it as "the fixed wing movement of regulated casualties to and between medical treatment facilities, using organic and/or contracted mobility airframes, with aircrew trained explicitly for this mission." aeromedical evacuation forces can operate as far forward as fixed-wing aircraft are able to conduct airland operations.[19]

global strike[edit]
main articles: strategic bombing and nuclear warfare
global precision attack is the ability to hold at risk or strike rapidly and persistently, with a wide range of munitions, any target and to create swift, decisive, and precise effects across multiple domains.[19]

 an air force a-10 demonstrating close air support at nellis afb
strategic attack is defined as "offensive action specifically selected to achieve national strategic objectives. these attacks seek to weaken the adversary's ability or will to engage in conflict, and may achieve strategic objectives without necessarily having to achieve operational objectives as a precondition" (annex 3–70, strategic attack).[19]
air interdiction is defined as "air operations conducted to divert, disrupt, delay, or destroy the enemy's military potential before it can be brought to bear effectively against friendly forces, or to otherwise achieve jfc objectives. air interdiction is conducted at such distance from friendly forces that detailed integration of each air mission with the fire and movement of friendly forces is not required" (annex 3-03, counterland operations).[19]
close air support is defined as "air action by fixed- and rotary-winged aircraft against hostile targets that are in close proximity to friendly forces and which require detailed integration of each air mission with the fire and movement of those forces" (jp 1-02). this can be as a pre-planned event or on demand from an alert posture (ground or airborne). it can be conducted across the romo.[19]
the purpose of nuclear deterrence operations (ndo) is to operate, maintain, and secure nuclear forces to achieve an assured capability to deter an adversary from taking action against vital us interests. in the event deterrence fails, the us should be able to appropriately respond with nuclear options. the sub-elements of this function are:[19]

 test launch of a lgm-30 minuteman intercontinental ballistic missile from vandenberg afb
assure/dissuade/deter is a mission set derived from the air force's readiness to carry out the nuclear strike operations mission as well as from specific actions taken to assure allies as a part of extended deterrence. dissuading others from acquiring or proliferating wmd, and the means to deliver them, contributes to promoting security and is also an integral part of this mission. moreover, different deterrence strategies are required to deter various adversaries, whether they are a nation state, or non-state/transnational actor. the air force maintains and presents credible deterrent capabilities through successful visible demonstrations and exercises which assure allies, dissuade proliferation, deter potential adversaries from actions that threaten us national security or the populations and deployed military forces of the us, its allies and friends.[19]
nuclear strike is the ability of nuclear forces to rapidly and accurately strike targets which the enemy holds dear in a devastating manner. if a crisis occurs, rapid generation and, if necessary, deployment of nuclear strike capabilities will demonstrate us resolve and may prompt an adversary to alter the course of action deemed threatening to our national interest. should deterrence fail, the president may authorize a precise, tailored response to terminate the conflict at the lowest possible level and lead to a rapid cessation of hostilities. post-conflict, regeneration of a credible nuclear deterrent capability will deter further aggression. the air force may present a credible force posture in either the continental united states, within a theater of operations, or both to effectively deter the range of potential adversaries envisioned in the 21st century. this requires the ability to engage targets globally using a variety of methods; therefore, the air force should possess the ability to induct, train, assign, educate and exercise individuals and units to rapidly and effectively execute missions that support us ndo objectives. finally, the air force regularly exercises and evaluates all aspects of nuclear operations to ensure high levels of performance.[19]
nuclear surety ensures the safety, security and effectiveness of nuclear operations. because of their political and military importance, destructive power, and the potential consequences of an accident or unauthorized act, nuclear weapons and nuclear weapon systems require special consideration and protection against risks and threats inherent in their peacetime and wartime environments. the air force, in conjunction with other entities within the departments of defense or energy, achieves a high standard of protection through a stringent nuclear surety program. this program applies to materiel, personnel, and procedures that contribute to the safety, security, and control of nuclear weapons, thus assuring no nuclear accidents, incidents, loss, or unauthorized or accidental use (a broken arrow incident). the air force continues to pursue safe, secure and effective nuclear weapons consistent with operational requirements. adversaries, allies, and the american people must be highly confident of the air force's ability to secure nuclear weapons from accidents, theft, loss, and accidental or unauthorized use. this day-to-day commitment to precise and reliable nuclear operations is the cornerstone of the credibility of the ndo mission. positive nuclear command, control, communications; effective nuclear weapons security; and robust combat support are essential to the overall ndo function.[19]

command and control[edit]
main articles: command and control, air and space operations center, and joint force air component commander
command and control is "the exercise of authority and direction by a properly designated commander over assigned and attached forces in the accomplishment of the mission. command and control functions are performed through an arrangement of personnel, equipment, communications, facilities, and procedures employed by a commander in planning, directing, coordinating, and controlling forces and operations in the accomplishment of the mission" (jp 1-02). this core function includes all of the c2-related capabilities and activities associated with air, space, cyberspace, nuclear, and agile combat support operations to achieve strategic, operational, and tactical objectives.[19]

 combined air and space operations center at al udeid air base
at the strategic level command and control, the us determines national or multinational security objectives and guidance, and develops and uses national resources to accomplish these objectives. these national objectives in turn provide the direction for developing overall military objectives, which are used to develop the objectives and strategy for each theater.[19]
at the operational level command and control, campaigns and major operations are planned, conducted, sustained, and assessed to accomplish strategic goals within theaters or areas of operations. these activities imply a broader dimension of time or space than do tactics; they provide the means by which tactical successes are exploited to achieve strategic and operational objectives.[19]
tactical level command and control is where individual battles and engagements are fought. the tactical level of war deals with how forces are employed, and the specifics of how engagements are conducted and targets attacked. the goal of tactical level c2 is to achieve commander's intent and desired effects by gaining and keeping offensive initiative.[19]

history[edit]
main article: history of the united states air force
the u.s. war department created the first antecedent of the u.s. air force, as a part of the u.s. army, on 1 august 1907, which through a succession of changes of organization, titles, and missions advanced toward eventual independence 40 years later. in world war ii, almost 68,000 u.s. airmen died helping to win the war, with only the infantry suffering more casualties.[23] in practice, the u.s. army air forces (usaaf) was virtually independent of the army during world war ii, and in virtually all ways functioned as an independent service branch, but airmen still pressed for formal independence.[24] the national security act of 1947 was signed on 26 july 1947 by president harry s truman, which established the department of the air force, but it was not until 18 september 1947, when the first secretary of the air force, w. stuart symington, was sworn into office that the air force was officially formed as an independent service branch.[25][26]
the act created the national military establishment (renamed department of defense in 1949), which was composed of three subordinate military departments, namely the department of the army, the department of the navy, and the newly created department of the air force.[27] prior to 1947, the responsibility for military aviation was shared between the army air forces and its predecessor organizations (for land-based operations), the navy (for sea-based operations from aircraft carriers and amphibious aircraft), and the marine corps (for close air support of marine corps operations). the 1940s proved to be important for military aviation in other ways as well. in 1947, air force captain chuck yeager broke the sound barrier in his x-1 rocket-powered aircraft, beginning a new era of aeronautics in america.[28]

 roundels that have appeared on u.s. military aircraft 1.) 5/1917–2/1918 2.) 2/1918–8/1919 3.) 8/1919–5/1942 4.) 5/1942–6/1943 5.) 6/1943–9/1943 6.) 9/1943–1/1947 7.) 1/1947–
antecedents[edit]
the predecessor organizations in the army of today's air force are:

aeronautical division, signal corps (1 august 1907 – 18 july 1914)
aviation section, signal corps (18 july 1914 – 20 may 1918)
division of military aeronautics (20 may 1918 to 24 may 1918)
u.s. army air service (24 may 1918 to 2 july 1926)
u.s. army air corps (2 july 1926 to 20 june 1941) and
u.s. army air forces (20 june 1941 to 18 september 1947)
21st century[edit]
during the early 2000s, the usaf fumbled several high-profile aircraft procurement projects, such as the missteps on the kc-x and f-35 program.[29] as a result, the usaf aviation force is setting new records for average aircraft age and needs to replace its force of fighters, bombers, tankers, and airborne warning aircraft, a task made all the more difficult in an age of restrictive defense budgets.[30]
since 2005, the usaf has placed a strong focus on the improvement of basic military training (bmt) for enlisted personnel. while the intense training has become longer, it also has shifted to include a deployment phase. this deployment phase, now called the beast, places the trainees in a simulated combat environment that they may experience once they deploy. while the trainees do tackle the massive obstacle courses along with the beast, the other portions include defending and protecting their base of operations, forming a structure of leadership, directing search and recovery, and basic self aid buddy care. during this event, the military training instructors (mti) act as mentors and opposing forces in a deployment exercise.[31]
in 2007, the usaf undertook a reduction-in-force (rif). because of budget constraints, the usaf planned to reduce the service's size from 360,000 active duty personnel to 316,000.[32] the size of the active duty force in 2007 was roughly 64% of that of what the usaf was at the end of the first gulf war in 1991.[33] however, the reduction was ended at approximately 330,000 personnel in 2008 in order to meet the demand signal of combatant commanders and associated mission requirements.[32] these same constraints have seen a sharp reduction in flight hours for crew training since 2005[34] and the deputy chief of staff for manpower and personnel directing airmen's time assessments.[35]
on 5 june 2008, secretary of defense robert gates accepted the resignations of both the secretary of the air force, michael wynne, and the chief of staff of the air force, general t. michael moseley. in his decision to fire both men gates cited "systemic issues associated with... declining air force nuclear mission focus and performance".[36] left unmentioned by gates was that he had repeatedly clashed with wynne and moseley over other important non-nuclear related issues to the service.[36] this followed an investigation into two embarrassing incidents involving mishandling of nuclear weapons: specifically a nuclear weapons incident aboard a b-52 flight between minot afb and barksdale afb, and an accidental shipment of nuclear weapons components to taiwan.[37] to put more emphasis on nuclear assets, the usaf established the nuclear-focused air force global strike command on 24 october 2008, which later assumed control of all usaf bomber aircraft.[38]
on 26 june 2009, the usaf released a force structure plan that cut fighter aircraft and shifted resources to better support nuclear, irregular and information warfare.[39] on 23 july 2009, the usaf released their unmanned aerial system (uas) flight plan, detailing air force uas plans through 2047.[40] one third of the planes that the usaf planned to buy in the future were to be unmanned.[41] according to air force chief scientist, dr. greg zacharias, the usaf anticipates having hypersonic weapons by the 2020s, hypersonic rpas by the 2030s and recoverable hypersonic rpas aircraft by the 2040s.[42] air force intends to deploy a sixth-generation jet fighter by the mid–2030s.[42]

conflicts[edit]
 the sr-71 blackbird was a cold war reconnaissance plane.
 the f-117 nighthawk was a stealth attack aircraft (retired from service in april 2008).
the united states air force has been involved in many wars, conflicts and operations using military air operations. the usaf possesses the lineage and heritage of its predecessor organizations, which played a pivotal role in u.s. military operations since 1907:

mexican expedition[43] as aviation section, u.s. signal corps
world war i[44] as aviation section, u.s. signal corps and united states army air service
world war ii[44] as united states army air forces
cold war
korean war
vietnam war
operation eagle claw (1980 iranian hostage rescue)
operation urgent fury (1983 us invasion of grenada)
operation el dorado canyon (1986 us bombing of libya)
operation just cause (1989–1990 us invasion of panama)
operations desert shield and desert storm (1990–1991 persian gulf war)
operation southern watch (1992–2003 iraq no-fly zone)
operation deliberate force (1995 nato bombing in bosnia and herzegovina)
operation northern watch (1997–2003 iraq no-fly zone)
operation desert fox (1998 bombing of iraq)
operation allied force (1999 nato bombing of yugoslavia)
operation enduring freedom (2001–2014 afghanistan war)
operation iraqi freedom (2003–2010 iraq war)
operation new dawn (2010–2011 iraq war)
operation odyssey dawn (2011 libyan no-fly zone)
operation inherent resolve (2014–present: intervention against the islamic state of iraq and the levant)
operation freedom's sentinel (2015–present afghanistan war)
in addition since the usaf dwarfs all other u.s. and allied air components, it often provides support for allied forces in conflicts to which the united states is otherwise not involved, such as the 2013 french campaign in mali.[45]

humanitarian operations[edit]
the usaf has also taken part in numerous humanitarian operations. some of the more major ones include the following:[46]

berlin airlift (operation vittles), 1948–1949
operation safe haven, 1956–1957
operations babylift, new life, frequent wind, and new arrivals, 1975
operation provide comfort, 1991
operation sea angel, 1991
operation provide hope, 1992–1993
operation provide promise, 1992–1996
operation unified assistance, december 2004 – april 2005
operation unified response, 14 january 2010–present[47]
operation tomodachi, 12 march 2011 – 1 may 2011[48]
organization[edit]
main articles: structure of the united states air force and department of the air force structure
administrative organization[edit]
the department of the air force is one of three military departments within the department of defense, and is managed by the civilian secretary of the air force, under the authority, direction, and control of the secretary of defense. the senior officials in the office of the secretary are the under secretary of the air force, four assistant secretaries of the air force and the general counsel, all of whom are appointed by the president with the advice and consent of the senate. the senior uniformed leadership in the air staff is made up of the chief of staff of the air force and the vice chief of staff of the air force.[49]
the directly subordinate commands and units are named field operating agency (foa), direct reporting unit (dru), and the currently unused separate operating agency.
the major command (majcom) is the superior hierarchical level of command. including the air force reserve command, as of 30 september 2006, usaf has ten major commands. the numbered air force (naf) is a level of command directly under the majcom, followed by operational command (now unused), air division (also now unused), wing, group, squadron, and flight.[49][50]

air force structure and organization[edit]
 headquarters, united states air force (hqaf):



major commands

current commander

location of headquarters


 air combat command (acc)
gen james m. holmes
langley air force base, joint base langley-eustis, virginia, u.s.


 air education and training command (aetc)
lt gen steven l. kwast
randolph air force base, joint base san antonio, texas, u.s.


 air force global strike command (afgsc)
gen timothy ray
barksdale air force base, louisiana, u.s.


 air force materiel command (afmc)
lt gen robert d. mcmurry jr (acting)
wright-patterson air force base, ohio, u.s.


 air force reserve command (afrc)
lt gen richard w. scobee
robins air force base, georgia, u.s.


 air force space command (afspc)
gen john w. raymond
peterson air force base, colorado, u.s.


 air force special operations command (afsoc)
lt gen marshall b. webb
hurlburt field, florida, u.s.


 air mobility command (amc)
gen maryanne miller
scott air force base, illinois, u.s.


 pacific air forces (pacaf)
gen charles q. brown jr
hickam air force base, joint base pearl harbor-hickam, hawaii, u.s.


  united states air forces in europe - air forces africa (usafe-afa)
gen tod d. wolters
ramstein air base, rhineland-palatinate, germany


direct reporting units

current commander

location of headquarters


 air force district of washington (afdw)
maj gen james a. jacobson
andrews air force base, joint base andrews, maryland, u.s.


 air force operational test and evaluation center (afotec)
maj gen michael brewer
kirtland air force base, new mexico, u.s.


 united states air force academy (usafa)
lt gen jay b. silveria
air force academy, colorado, u.s.


the major components of the u.s. air force, as of 28 august 2015, are the following:[51]

active duty forces
57 flying wings, eight space wings, and 55 non-flying wings
nine flying groups, eight non-flying groups
134 flying squadrons, 43 space squadrons
air force reserve command
35 flying wings, one space wing
four flying groups
67 flying squadrons, six space squadrons
air national guard
87 flying wings
101 flying squadrons, four space squadrons
civil air patrol[52]
eight regional commands and 52 wings
the usaf, including its air reserve component (e.g., air force reserve + air national guard), possesses a total of 302 flying squadrons.[53]

operational organization[edit]
this section needs additional citations for verification. please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed.find sources: "united states air force" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · jstor (january 2018) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
main article: list of active united states air force aircraft squadrons
the organizational structure as shown above is responsible for the peacetime organization, equipping, and training of aerospace units for operational missions. when required to support operational missions, the secretary of defense (secdef) directs the secretary of the air force (secaf) to execute a change in operational control (chop) of these units from their administrative alignment to the operational command of a regional combatant commander (ccdr). in the case of afspc, afsoc, pacaf, and usafe units, forces are normally employed in-place under their existing ccdr. likewise, amc forces operating in support roles retain their componency to ustranscom unless chopped to a regional ccdr.

air and space expeditionary task force[edit]
"chopped" units are referred to as forces. the top-level structure of these forces is the air and space expeditionary task force (aetf). the aetf is the air force presentation of forces to a ccdr for the employment of air power. each ccdr is supported by a standing component numbered air force (c-naf) to provide planning and execution of aerospace forces in support of ccdr requirements. each c-naf consists of a commander, air force forces (comaffor) and affor/a-staff, and an air operations center (aoc). as needed to support multiple joint force commanders (jfc) in the ccmd's area of responsibility (aor), the c-naf may deploy air component coordinate elements (acce) to liaise with the jfc. if the air force possesses the preponderance of air forces in a jfc's area of operations, the comaffor will also serve as the joint forces air component commander (jfacc).

commander, air force forces[edit]
the commander, air force forces (comaffor) is the senior usaf officer responsible for the employment of air power in support of jfc objectives. the comaffor has a special staff and an a-staff to ensure assigned or attached forces are properly organized, equipped, and trained to support the operational mission.

air operations center[edit]
the air operations center (aoc) is the jfacc's command and control (c2) center. several aocs have been established throughout the air force worldwide. these centers are responsible for planning and executing air power missions in support of jfc objectives.

air expeditionary wings/groups/squadrons[edit]
the aetf generates air power to support ccmd objectives from air expeditionary wings (aew) or air expeditionary groups (aeg). these units are responsible for receiving combat forces from air force majcoms, preparing these forces for operational missions, launching and recovering these forces, and eventually returning forces to the majcoms. theater air control systems control employment of forces during these missions.

personnel[edit]
the classification of any usaf job for officers or enlisted airmen is the air force specialty code (afsc).
afscs range from officer specialties such as pilot, combat systems officer, space operations, special tactics, nuclear and missile operations, intelligence, cyberspace operations, judge advocate general (jag), medical doctor, nurse or other fields, to various enlisted specialties. the latter range from flight combat operations such as loadmaster, to working in a dining facility to ensure that airmen are properly fed. there are additional occupational fields such as computer specialties, mechanic specialties, enlisted aircrew, communication systems, cyberspace operations, avionics technicians, medical specialties, civil engineering, public affairs, hospitality, law, drug counseling, mail operations, security forces, and search and rescue specialties.[54]
beyond combat flight crew personnel, other combat usaf afscs are special tactics officer, explosive ordnance disposal (eod), combat rescue officer, pararescue, security forces, combat control, combat weather, tactical air control party, special operations weather technician, and afosi agents.
nearly all enlisted career fields are "entry level", meaning that the usaf provides all training. some enlistees are able to choose a particular field, or at least a field before actually joining, while others are assigned an afsc at basic military training (bmt). after bmt, new enlisted airmen attend a technical training school where they learn their particular afsc. second air force, a part of air education and training command, is responsible for nearly all enlisted technical training.
training programs vary in length; for example, 3m0x1 (services) has 31 days of tech school training, while 3e8x1 (explosive ordnance disposal) is one year of training with a preliminary school and a main school consisting of over 10 separate divisions, sometimes taking students close to two years to complete. officer technical training conducted by second air force can also vary by afsc, while flight training for aeronautically-rated officers conducted by aetc's nineteenth air force can last well in excess of one year.
usaf rank is divided between enlisted airmen, non-commissioned officers, and commissioned officers, and ranges from the enlisted airman basic (e-1) to the commissioned officer rank of general (o-10), however in times of war officers may be appointed to the higher grade of general of the air force. enlisted promotions are granted based on a combination of test scores, years of experience, and selection board approval while officer promotions are based on time-in-grade and a promotion selection board. promotions among enlisted personnel and non-commissioned officers are generally designated by increasing numbers of insignia chevrons.[55] commissioned officer rank is designated by bars, oak leaves, a silver eagle, and anywhere from one to five stars.[56] general of the air force henry "hap" arnold is the only individual in the history of the us air force to attain the rank of five-star general.[57]

commissioned officers[edit]
main article: united states air force officer rank insignia
the commissioned officer ranks of the usaf are divided into three categories: company grade officers, field grade officers, and general officers. company grade officers are those officers in pay grades o-1 to o-3, while field grade officers are those in pay grades o-4 to o-6, and general officers are those in pay grades of o-7 and above.[58]
air force officer promotions are governed by the defense officer personnel management act of 1980 and its companion reserve officer personnel management act (ropma) for officers in the air force reserve and the air national guard. dopma also establishes limits on the number of officers that can serve at any given time in the air force. currently, promotion from second lieutenant to first lieutenant is virtually guaranteed after two years of satisfactory service. the promotion from first lieutenant to captain is competitive after successfully completing another two years of service, with a selection rate varying between 99% and 100%. promotion to major through major general is through a formal selection board process, while promotions to lieutenant general and general are contingent upon nomination to specific general officer positions and subject to u.s. senate approval.
during the board process an officer's record is reviewed by a selection board at the air force personnel center at randolph air force base in san antonio, texas. at the 10 to 11-year mark, captains will take part in a selection board to major. if not selected, they will meet a follow-on board to determine if they will be allowed to remain in the air force. promotion from major to lieutenant colonel is similar and occurs approximately between the thirteen year (for officers who were promoted to major early "below the zone") and the fifteen year mark, where a certain percentage of majors will be selected below zone (i.e., "early"), in zone (i.e., "on time") or above zone (i.e., "late") for promotion to lieutenant colonel. this process will repeat at the 16-year mark (for officers previously promoted early to major and lieutenant colonel) to the 21-year mark for promotion to full colonel.
the air force has the largest ratio of general officers to total strength of all of the u.s. armed forces and this ratio has continued to increase even as the force has shrunk from its cold war highs.[59]



us dod pay grade
o-1
o-2
o-3
o-4
o-5
o-6
o-7
o-8
o-9
o-10
special1


insignia
























air force service dress uniform insignia
























title

second lieutenant

first lieutenant

captain

major

lieutenant colonel

colonel

brigadier general

major general

lieutenant general

general

general of the air force


abbreviation
2d lt
1st lt
capt
maj
lt col
col
brig gen
maj gen
lt gen
gen
gaf


nato code
of-1
of-2
of-3
of-4
of-5
of-6
of-7
of-8
of-9
of-10
of-10




no periods are used in actual grade abbreviation, only in press releases to conform with ap standards.[60]
1 honorary/war time rank.

warrant officers[edit]
main article: warrant officer (united states) § air force
although provision is made in title 10 of the united states code for the secretary of the air force to appoint warrant officers, the air force does not currently use warrant officer grades, and is the only one of the u.s. armed services not to do so. the air force inherited warrant officer ranks from the army at its inception in 1947. the air force stopped appointing warrant officers in 1959,[61] the same year the first promotions were made to the new top enlisted grade, chief master sergeant. most of the existing air force warrant officers entered the commissioned officer ranks during the 1960s, but small numbers continued to exist in the warrant officer grades for the next 21 years.
the last active duty air force warrant officer, cwo4 james h. long, retired in 1980 and the last air force reserve warrant officer, cwo4 bob barrow, retired in 1992.[62] upon his retirement, he was honorarily promoted to cwo5, the only person in the air force ever to hold this grade.[61] since barrow's retirement, the air force warrant officer ranks, while still authorized by law, are not used.

enlisted airmen[edit]
 pararescuemen and a simulated "survivor" watch as an hh-60g pave hawk helicopter comes in for a landing.
main article: united states air force enlisted rank insignia
enlisted airmen have pay grades from e-1 (entry level) to e-9 (senior enlisted). while all usaf personnel, enlisted and officer, are referred to as airmen, in the same manner that all army personnel, enlisted and officer, are referred to as soldiers, the term also refers to the pay grades of e-1 through e-4, which are below the level of non-commissioned officers (ncos). above the pay grade of e-4 (i.e., pay grades e-5 through e-9) all ranks fall into the category of nco and are further subdivided into "ncos" (pay grades e-5 and e-6) and "senior ncos" (pay grades e-7 through e-9); the term "junior nco" is sometimes used to refer to staff sergeants and technical sergeants (pay grades e-5 and e-6).[63]
the usaf is the only branch of the u.s. military where nco status is achieved when an enlisted person reaches the pay grade of e-5. in all other branches, nco status is generally achieved at the pay grade of e-4 (e.g., a corporal in the army[64] and marine corps, petty officer third class in the navy and coast guard). the air force mirrored the army from 1976 to 1991 with an e-4 being either a senior airman wearing three stripes without a star or a sergeant (referred to as "buck sergeant"), which was noted by the presence of the central star and considered an nco. despite not being an nco, a senior airman who has completed airman leadership school can be a supervisor according to the afi 36-2618.



us dod pay grade
e-1
e-2
e-3
e-4
e-5
e-6
e-7
e-8
e-9


insignia

no insignia




























title

airman basic

airman

airman first class

senior airman

staff sergeant

technical sergeant

master sergeant¹

senior master sergeant¹

chief master sergeant¹

command chief master sergeant

chief master sergeant of the air force


abbreviation
ab
amn
a1c
sra
ssgt
tsgt
msgt
smsgt
cmsgt
ccm
cmsaf


nato code
or-1
or-2
or-3
or-4
or-5
or-6
or-7
or-8
or-9
or-9
or-9



¹ the usaf does not have a separate first sergeant rank; it is instead a duty denoted by a diamond within the upper field.


uniforms[edit]
main article: uniforms of the united states air force
the first usaf dress uniform, in 1947, was dubbed and patented "uxbridge blue" after "uxbridge 1683 blue", developed at the former bachman-uxbridge worsted company.[65] the current service dress uniform, which was adopted in 1994, consists of a three-button, pocketless coat, with silver "u.s." pins on the lapels for officers or with a silver ring surrounding on those of enlisted airmen, matching trousers, and either a service cap or flight cap, all in shade 1620, "air force blue" (a darker purplish-blue).[66] this is worn with a light blue shirt (shade 1550) and shade 1620 herringbone patterned necktie. enlisted airmen wear sleeve rank on both the jacket and shirt, while officers wear metal rank insignia pinned onto the epaulet loopson the coat, and air force blue slide-on epaulet loops on the shirt. usaf personnel assigned to base honor guard duties wear, for certain occasions, a modified version of the standard service dress uniform, but with silver trim on the sleeves and trousers, with the addition of a ceremonial belt (if necessary), service cap with silver trim and hap arnold device, and a silver aiguillette placed on the left shoulder seam and all devices and accoutrement.
the airman battle uniform (abu) became the sole authorized combat and utility uniform (except the flight duty uniform for aviation and missile airmen) of the usaf on 1 november 2011. the abu replaced the battle dress uniform (bdu) previously worn by all u.s. military forces. airmen who are assigned to air force special operations command, deployed to air forces central command aor, certain global strike command security forces, and other air force ground combat forces wear the airman combat uniform (acu) in the operational camouflage pattern. the air force will replace the abu with the ocp uniform, starting on 1 october 2018. [67][68]

awards and badges[edit]
main articles: awards and decorations of the united states air force and badges of the united states air force
in addition to basic uniform clothing, various badges are used by the usaf to indicate a billet assignment or qualification-level for a given assignment. badges can also be used as merit-based or service-based awards. over time, various badges have been discontinued and are no longer distributed.

training[edit]
see also: air force specialty code
all enlisted airmen attend basic military training (bmt) at lackland air force base in san antonio, texas for 8 1/2 weeks. individuals who have prior service of over 24 months of active duty in the other service branches who seek to enlist in the air force must go through a 10-day air force familiarization course rather than enlisted bmt, however prior service opportunities are severely limited.[69][70]
officers may be commissioned upon graduation from the united states air force academy, upon graduation from another college or university through the air force reserve officer training corps (afrotc) program, or through the air force officer training school (ots). ots, located at maxwell air force base in montgomery, alabama since 1993, in turn encompasses two separate commissioning programs: basic officer training (bot), which is for officer candidates for the regular air force and the air force reserve; and the academy of military science (ams), which is for officer candidates of the air national guard.
the air force also provides commissioned officer training (cot) for officers of all three components who are direct-commissioned into medicine, law, religion, biological sciences, or healthcare administration. cot is fully integrated into the ots program and today encompasses extensive coursework as well as field exercises in leadership, confidence, fitness, and deployed-environment operations.

air force fitness test[edit]
 usaf airmen training at lackland afb
main article: united states air force fitness assessment
the us air force fitness test (afft) is designed to test the abdominal circumference, muscular strength/endurance and cardiovascular respiratory fitness of airmen in the usaf. as part of the fit to fight program, the usaf adopted a more stringent physical fitness assessment; the new fitness program was put into effect on 1 june 2010. the annual ergo-cycle test which the usaf had used for several years had been replaced in 2004. in the afft, airmen are given a score based on performance consisting of four components: waist circumference, the sit-up, the push-up, and a 1.5-mile (2.4 km) run. airmen can potentially earn a score of 100, with the run counting as 60%, waist circumference as 20%, and both strength test counting as 10% each. a passing score is 75 points. effective 1 july 2010, the afft is administered by the base fitness assessment cell (fac), and is required twice a year. personnel may test once a year if he or she earns a score above a 90%. additionally, only meeting the minimum standards on each one of these tests will not get you a passing score of 75%, and failing any one component will result in a failure for the entire test.


aircraft inventory[edit]
main article: list of active united states air force aircraft
the u.s. air force has over 5,638 aircraft in service as of september 2012.[71] until 1962, the army and air force maintained one system of aircraft naming, while the u.s. navy maintained a separate system. in 1962, these were unified into a single system heavily reflecting the army/air force method. for more complete information on the workings of this system, refer to united states department of defense aerospace vehicle designation. the various aircraft of the air force include:


a – attack[edit]
 a-10 thunderbolt ii ground-attack aircraft
the attack aircraft[72] of the usaf are designed to attack targets on the ground and are often deployed as close air support for, and in proximity to, u.s. ground forces. the proximity to friendly forces require precision strikes from these aircraft that are not always possible with bomber aircraft. their role is tactical rather than strategic, operating at the front of the battle rather than against targets deeper in the enemy's rear. the air force is currently running the oa-x experiment, with the intent to procure an off the shelf light attack aircraft. current usaf attack aircraft are operated by air combat command, pacific air forces, and air force special operations command.

a-10c thunderbolt ii
ac-130j ghostrider
ac-130u spooky ii
ac-130w stinger ii

b – bombers[edit]
 b-2 spirit stealth bomber
us air force bombers are strategic weapons, primarily used for long range strike missions with either conventional or nuclear ordinance. traditionally used for attacking strategic targets, today many bombers are also used in the tactical mission, such as providing close air support for ground forces and tactical interdiction missions.[73] all air force bombers are under global strike command[74]
the service's b-2a aircraft entered service in the 1990s, its b-1b aircraft in the 1980s and its current b-52h aircraft in the early 1960s. the b-52 stratofortress airframe design is over 60 years old and the b-52h aircraft currently in the active inventory were all built between 1960 and 1962. the b-52h is scheduled to remain in service for another 30 years, which would keep the airframe in service for nearly 90 years, an unprecedented length of service for any aircraft. the b-21 is projected to replace the b-52 and parts of the b-1b force by the mid-2020s.[75]

b-1b lancer
b-2a spirit
b-52h stratofortress

c – transport[edit]
 c-17 globemaster iii, the usaf's newest and most versatile transport plane
transport aircraft are typically used to deliver troops, weapons and other military equipment by a variety of methods to any area of military operations around the world, usually outside of the commercial flight routes in uncontrolled airspace. the workhorses of the usaf airlift forces are the c-130 hercules, c-17 globemaster iii, and c-5 galaxy. the cv-22 is used by the air force for special operations. it conducts long-range, special operations missions, and is equipped with extra fuel tanks and terrain-following radar. some aircraft serve specialized transportation roles such as executive/embassy support (c-12), antarctic support (lc-130h), and afsoc support (c-27j, c-145a, and c-146a). although most of the us air force's cargo aircraft were specially designed with the air force in mind, some aircraft such as the c-12 huron (beechcraft super king air) and c-146 (dornier 328) are militarized conversions of existing civilian aircraft. transport aircraft are operated by air mobility command, air force special operations command, and united states air forces in europe – air forces africa.

c-5b, c-5c and c-5m galaxy
c-12c, c-12d, c-12f and c-12j huron
c-17a globemaster iii
c-27j spartan
c-130h, lc-130h, and wc-130h hercules
c-130j and c-130j-30 super hercules
c-144
c-145a skytruck
c-146a wolfhound
cv-22b osprey

e – special electronic[edit]
 e-3 sentry airborne warning and control system
the purpose of electronic warfare is to deny the opponent an advantage in the ems and ensure friendly, unimpeded access to the em spectrum portion of the information environment. electronic warfare aircraft are used to keep airspaces friendly, and send critical information to anyone who needs it. they are often called "the eye in the sky".  the roles of the aircraft vary greatly among the different variants to include electronic warfare/jamming (ec-130h), psychological operations/communications (ec-130j), airborne early warning and control (e-3), airborne command post (e-4b), ground targeting radar (e-8c), range control (e-9a), and communications relay (e-11a, eq-4b).

e-3b, e-3c and e-3g sentry
e-4b "nightwatch"
e-8c jstars
e-9a widget
e-11a
ec-130h compass call
ec-130j commando solo
eq-4b global hawk

f – fighter[edit]
 f-22 raptor stealth air superiority fighter
the fighter aircraft of the usaf are small, fast, and maneuverable military aircraft primarily used for air-to-air combat. many of these fighters have secondary ground-attack capabilities, and some are dual-roled as fighter-bombers (e.g., the f-16 fighting falcon); the term "fighter" is also sometimes used colloquially for dedicated ground-attack aircraft, such as the f-117 nighthawk. other missions include interception of bombers and other fighters, reconnaissance, and patrol. the f-16 is currently used by the usaf air demonstration squadron, the thunderbirds, while a small number of both man-rated and non-man-rated f-4 phantom ii are retained as qf-4 aircraft for use as full scale aerial targets (fsat) or as part of the usaf heritage flight program. these extant qf-4 aircraft are being replaced in the fsat role by early model f-16 aircraft converted to qf-16 configuration. the usaf has 2,025 fighters in service as of september 2012.[71]

f-15c and f-15d eagle
f-15e strike eagle
f-16c and f-16d fighting falcon
f-22a raptor
f-35a lightning ii

h – search and rescue[edit]
these aircraft are used for search and rescue and combat search and rescue on land or sea. the hc-130n/p aircraft are being replaced by newer hc-130j models. hh-60u are replacement aircraft for "g" models that have been lost in combat operations or accidents. new hh-60w helicopters are under development to replace both the "g" and "u" model pave hawks.

hc-130n and hc-130p combat king
hc-130j combat king ii
hh-60g and hh-60u pave hawk

k – tanker[edit]
 kc-10 extender tri-jet air-to-air tanker
the usaf's kc-135 and kc-10 aerial refueling aircraft are based on civilian jets. the usaf aircraft are equipped primarily for providing the fuel via a tail-mounted refueling boom, and can be equipped with "probe and drogue" refueling systems. air-to-air refueling is extensively used in large-scale operations and also used in normal operations; fighters, bombers, and cargo aircraft rely heavily on the lesser-known "tanker" aircraft. this makes these aircraft an essential part of the air force's global mobility and the u.s. force projection. the kc-46a pegasus began to be delivered to usaf units starting in 2019.

kc-10a extender
boeing kc-46a pegasus
kc-135r and kc-135t stratotanker

m – multi-mission[edit]
 mc-12w liberty at beale afb
specialized multi-mission aircraft provide support for global special operations missions. these aircraft conduct infiltration, exfiltration, resupply, and refueling for sof teams from improvised or otherwise short runways. the mc-130j is currently being fielded to replace "h" and "p" models used by u.s. special operations command. the mc-12w is used in the intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (isr) role.
initial generations of rpas were primarily surveillance aircraft, but some were fitted with weaponry (such as the mq-1 predator, which used agm-114 hellfire air-to-ground missiles). an armed rpa is known as an unmanned combat aerial vehicle (ucav).

mc-12w liberty
mc-130h combat talon ii
mc-130j commando ii
mc-130p combat shadow
mq-1b predator
mq-9b reaper
 mq-9 unmanned aerial vehicle
o – observation[edit]
these aircraft are modified to observe (through visual or other means) and report tactical information concerning composition and disposition of forces. the oc-135 is specifically designed to support the treaty on open skies by observing bases and operations of party members under the 2002 signed treaty.

oc-135b open skies

r – reconnaissance[edit]
 lockheed u-2 spy plane
the reconnaissance aircraft of the usaf are used for monitoring enemy activity, originally carrying no armament. although the u-2 is designated as a 'utility' aircraft, it is a reconnaissance platform. the roles of the aircraft vary greatly among the different variants to include general monitoring (rc-26b), ballistic missile monitoring (rc-135s), electronic intelligence gathering (rc-135u), signal intelligence gathering (rc-135v/w), and high altitude surveillance (u-2)
several unmanned remotely controlled reconnaissance aircraft (rpas), have been developed and deployed. recently, the rpas have been seen to offer the possibility of cheaper, more capable fighting machines that can be used without risk to aircrews.

rc-26b
rc-135s cobra ball
rc-135u combat sent
rc-135v and rc-135w rivet joint
rq-4b global hawk
rq-11 raven
rq-170 sentinel
u-2s "dragon lady"
 rq-170 sentinel stealth unmanned aerial vehicle reconnaissance aircraft
t – trainer[edit]
the air force's trainer aircraft are used to train pilots, combat systems officers, and other aircrew in their duties.

t-1a jayhawk
t-6a texan ii
t-38a, t-38b, t-38c, and at-38b talon
tg – trainer gliders[edit]
several gliders are used by the usaf, primarily used for cadet flying training at the u.s. air force academy.

tg-15a
tg-15b

u – utility[edit]
utility aircraft are used basically for what they are needed for at the time. for example, a huey may be used to transport personnel around a large base or launch site, while it can also be used for evacuation. these aircraft are all around use aircraft.

u-28a
uh-1n iroquois
uv-18b twin otter

v – vip staff transport[edit]
 vc-25a (air force one)
these aircraft are used for the transportation of very important persons (vips). notable people include the president, vice president, cabinet secretaries, government officials (e.g., senators and representatives), the joint chiefs of staff, and other key personnel.

vc-25a (two used as air force one)
c-20a, c20b, c20c, c-20g and c20h
c-21a learjet
c-32a and c-32b
c-37a and c-37b
c-38a courier
c-40b and c-40c

w – weather reconnaissance[edit]
 a wc-130j hercules from the 53rd weather reconnaissance squadron
these aircraft are used to study meteorological events such as hurricanes and typhoons.

wc-130j hurricane hunter
wc-135c and wc-135w constant phoenix

undesignated foreign aircraft[edit]
cn-235-100[76] (427th special operations squadron)

 an unarmed minuteman iii icbm shoots out of the silo during an operational test launch
lgm – ballistic missile[edit]
lgm-30g minuteman iii intercontinental ballistic missile
culture[edit]
the culture of the united states air force is primarily driven by pilots and so the pilots of various aircraft types have driven its priorities over the years. at first there was a focus on bombers (driven originally by the bomber mafia), followed by a focus on fighters (fighter mafia and following).[77][78][79]
in response to the 2007 united states air force nuclear weapons incident, secretary of defense robert gates accepted in june 2009 the resignations of secretary of the air force michael wynne and the chief of staff of the air force general t. michael moseley. moseley's successor, general norton a. schwartz, a former airlift and special operations pilot was the first officer appointed to that position who did not have a background as a fighter or bomber pilot.[80] the washington post reported in 2010 that general schwartz began to dismantle the rigid class system of the usaf, particularly in the officer corps.[81]
in 2014, following morale and testing/cheating scandals in the air force's missile launch officer community, secretary of the air force deborah lee james admitted that there remained a "systemic problem" in the usaf's management of the nuclear mission.[82]
daniel l. magruder, jr defines usaf culture as a combination of the rigorous application of advanced technology, individualism and progressive airpower theory.[83] major general charles j. dunlap, jr. adds that the u.s. air force's culture also includes an egalitarianism bred from officers perceiving themselves as their service's principal "warriors" working with small groups of enlisted airmen either as the service crew or the onboard crew of their aircraft. air force officers have never felt they needed the formal social "distance" from their enlisted force that is common in the other u.s. armed services. although the paradigm is changing, for most of its history, the air force, completely unlike its sister services, has been an organization in which mostly its officers fought, not its enlisted force, the latter being primarily a rear echelon support force. when the enlisted force did go into harm's way, such as crew members of multi-crewed aircraft, the close comradeship of shared risk in tight quarters created traditions that shaped a somewhat different kind of officer/enlisted relationship than exists elsewhere in the military.[84]
cultural and career issues in the u.s. air force have been cited as one of the reasons for the shortfall in needed uav operators.[85] in spite of an urgent need for uavs or drones to provide round the clock coverage for american troops during the iraq war,[86] the usaf did not establish a new career field for piloting them until the last year of that war and in 2014 changed its rpa training syllabus again, in the face of large aircraft losses in training,[87] and in response to a gao report critical of handling of drone programs.[88] paul scharre has reported that the cultural divide between the usaf and us army has kept both services from adopting each other's drone handing innovations.[89]
many of the u.s. air force's formal and informal traditions are an amalgamation of those taken from the royal air force (e.g., dining-ins/mess nights) or the experiences of its predecessor organizations such as the u.s. army air service, u.s. army air corps and the u.s. army air forces. some of these traditions range from "friday name tags" in flying units to an annual "mustache month".  the use of "challenge coins" dates back to world war i when a member of one of the aero squadrons bought his entire unit medallions with their emblem,[90] while another cultural tradition unique to the air force is the "roof stomp", practiced by airmen to welcome a new commander or to commemorate another event, such as a retirement.

see also[edit]


military of the united states portal
united states air force portal

airman's creed
air force association
air force combat ammunition center
air force knowledge now
company grade officers' council
department of the air force police
future military aircraft of the united states
list of active united states military aircraft
list of united states air force installations
list of united states airmen
list of u.s. air force acronyms and expressions
national museum of the united states air force
structure of the united states air force
united states air force band
united states air force chaplain corps
united states air force combat control team
united states air force medical service
united states air force thunderbirds
women in the united states air force

references[edit]


^ http://www.trademark.af.mil/about-us/other-properties/

^ https://www.loc.gov/rr/frd/military_law/pdf/olh_2015_ch23.pdf

^ "air force personnel demographics". air force personnel center. af.mil. archived from the original on 9 october 2016..mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/65/lock-green.svg/9px-lock-green.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d6/lock-gray-alt-2.svg/9px-lock-gray-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/aa/lock-red-alt-2.svg/9px-lock-red-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration{color:#555}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration span{border-bottom:1px dotted;cursor:help}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/wikisource-logo.svg/12px-wikisource-logo.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output code.cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:inherit;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#33aa33;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-right{padding-right:0.2em}

^ "department of defense (dod) releases fiscal year 2017 president's budget proposal". u.s. department of defense. 9 february 2016. archived from the original on 16 february 2016. retrieved 11 february 2016.

^ "air force magazine" (pdf). air force magazine. may 2012. archived (pdf) from the original on 14 september 2012.

^ "world air forces 2018". flightglobal: 17. retrieved 13 june 2018.

^ "air force arsenal of land-based nukes shrinking as planned". associated press. 20 march 2017. archived from the original on 19 march 2017. retrieved 20 march 2017.

^ "af 101" (pdf). archived (pdf) from the original on 23 may 2017. retrieved 18 september 2017.

^ "aim high ... fly-fight-win to be air force motto usaf". united states air force. 7 october 2010. archived from the original on 9 january 2018. retrieved 19 october 2010.

^ http://www.au.af.mil/au/awc/awcgate/maxwell/mp11.pdf

^ "the air force flag" (pdf). air force historical research agency. united states air force. 24 march 2007. archived from the original (pdf) on 2 september 2013. retrieved 7 august 2017.

^ http://static.e-publishing.af.mil/production/1/af_a1/publication/afi34-1201/afi34-1201.pdf

^ "these-are-worlds-largest-air-forces". newsweek.com. retrieved 5 september 2018.

^ "pentagon-f-22-raptor-f-35-upgrades". cnn.com. retrieved 5 september 2018.

^ "10 usc 8062". law.cornell.edu. 1 october 2009. retrieved 30 august 2010.

^ https://www.af.mil/about-us/

^ https://www.af.mil/about-us/

^ http://www.airforcemag.com/documentfile/documents/2015/future_operating_concept.pdf

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa ab ac ad ae air force basic doctrine, organization, and command archived 18 june 2016 at the wayback machine (pdf), 14 october 2011

^ "defense bill would make key changes in space command but stop short of new branch".

^ "archived copy". archived from the original on 20 august 2017. retrieved 18 september 2017.cs1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ "archived copy". archived from the original on 20 september 2017. retrieved 18 september 2017.cs1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ robert pitta, gordon rottman, jeff fannell (1993). us army air force (1) archived 28 april 2016 at the wayback machine. osprey publishing. p. 3. isbn 1-85532-295-1

^ "the army air forces in world war ii volume vi: men and planes: chapter 2". www.ibiblio.org.

^ "the air force fact sheet" archived 8 december 2014 at the wayback machine. u.s. air force. retrieved 30 december 2014.

^ national security act of 1947. u.s. intelligence community, october 2004. retrieved 14 april 2006.

^ u.s. department of state. national security act of 1947 archived 27 july 2013 at the wayback machine. retrieved 3 october 2010.

^ wildsmith, snow (2012). joining the united states air force. united states of america: mcfarland. p. 56. isbn 978-0-7864-4758-9. archived from the original on 4 september 2015.

^ francis, mike. "the gang that couldn't fly straight." archived 4 march 2016 at the wayback machine the oregonian, 22 november 2010

^ bennett, john t. "panetta selects trusted hand for new air force chief." archived 29 june 2017 at the wayback machine u.s. news & world report, 14 may 2012.

^ "air force basic military training – home". af.mil. archived from the original on 8 april 2015. retrieved 1 april 2015.

^ a b needed: 200 new aircraft a year archived 20 january 2013 at the wayback machine, air force magazine, october 2008.

^ "2008 usaf almanac: people" (pdf). air force magazine. archived (pdf) from the original on 7 july 2011. retrieved 2 september 2011. 1991: 510,000; 2007: 328,600

^ "air force magazine". wayback.archive-it.org. archived from the original on 24 may 2017.

^ maj. timothy farr. "airmen's time tour makes follow-up visits". af.mil. archived from the original on 18 july 2012. retrieved 30 august 2010.

^ a b "the gates case" (pdf) (july 2008). air force magazine. air force magazine. july 2008. archived (pdf) from the original on 23 november 2016. retrieved 22 november 2016.

^ "washington watch" archived 20 january 2013 at the wayback machine, air force magazine, july 2008, vol. 91 no. 7, pp. 8.

^ chavanne, bettina h. "usaf creates global strike command" archived 11 january 2012 at the wayback machine. aviation week, 24 october 2008.

^ "plan reshapes u.s. air power". airforcetimes.com. retrieved 30 august 2010.

^ gerry j. gilmore. "unmanned aircraft take on increased importance". af.mil. archived from the original on 29 july 2012. retrieved 30 august 2010.

^ 7 october 2009— (7 october 2009). "future u.s. defense needs in a high technology present – up front blog – brookings institution". brookings.edu. archived from the original on 26 october 2010. retrieved 30 august 2010.

^ a b "archived copy". archived from the original on 3 september 2017. retrieved 3 september 2017.cs1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ https://media.defense.gov/2010/oct/06/2001329754/-1/-1/0/afd-101006-029.pdf

^ a b "air force pamphlet 36-2241"[dead link]. usaf, 1 july 2007.

^ "usaf to help transport french troops to mali". airforcetimes.com. retrieved 1 april 2015.

^ the primary source for the humanitarian operations of the usaf is the united states air force supervisory examination study guide (2005)

^ http://www.amc.af.mil/portals/12/documents/afd-131018-050.pdf

^ http://www.af.mil/news/article-display/article/691286/yesterdays-air-force-operation-tomodachi/

^ a b http://www.airforcemag.com/magazinearchive/magazine%20documents/2013/may%202013/0513mc_rc.pdf

^ "what is the organizational structure of the air force?". the balance.

^ "2007 usaf almanac: major commands" (pdf). air force magazine. archived from the original (pdf) on 16 february 2008. retrieved 9 february 2008.

^ "civil air patrol joins total force 'airmen' > u.s. air force > article display". af.mil. archived from the original on 16 october 2015. retrieved 14 october 2015.

^ "2007 usaf almanac: usaf squadrons by mission type" (pdf). air force magazine. archived from the original (pdf) on 1 december 2007. retrieved 9 february 2008.

^ "air force specialty code information" (pdf). united states air force. july 2008. archived from the original (pdf) on 9 september 2008.

^ "enlisted air force ranks". military.com. military.com. archived from the original on 19 november 2016. retrieved 22 november 2016.

^ "air force officer ranks". military.com. military.com. archived from the original on 22 november 2016. retrieved 22 november 2016.

^ "five star generals and admirals of the united states". the history guy. the history guy. archived from the original on 23 november 2016. retrieved 22 november 2016.

^ united states air force officer rank insignia

^ schwellenbach, nick. "brass creep and the pentagon: air force leads the way as top offender." archived 3 march 2016 at the wayback machine pogo, 25 april 2011.

^ http://www.publicaffairs.af.mil/portals/1/documents/dod%20captioning%20style%20guide%20141017%20(3).pdf

^ a b "warrant officer programs of other services". united states army warrant officer association. archived from the original on 30 december 2006. retrieved 18 march 2007.

^ "warrant officers of the us military". militaryranks.us. 16 november 2006. archived from the original on 18 june 2010. retrieved 30 august 2010.

^ "department of defense enlisted rank insignias". defenselink.mil. archived from the original on 17 june 2008. retrieved 30 august 2010.

^ however, the army has dual ranks at the e-4 paygrade with specialists not considered ncos. since the 1980s, the army corporal rank has come to be awarded infrequently and is rarely found in modern units.

^ "getting the blues, by tech. sgt. pat mckenna". air force link. archived from the original on 2 february 2007. retrieved 24 september 2007.

^ "archived copy". archived from the original on 9 april 2016. retrieved 16 august 2017.cs1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ "archived copy". archived from the original on 16 august 2017. retrieved 16 august 2017.cs1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ http://www.af.mil/news/article-display/article/1520066/air-force-transitions-to-a-single-combat-uniform/

^ "archived copy". archived from the original on 16 august 2017. retrieved 16 august 2017.cs1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ "archived copy". archived from the original on 16 august 2017. retrieved 16 august 2017.cs1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ a b "usaf almanac, the air force in facts and figures" (pdf). air force magazine. may 2013. archived (pdf) from the original on 11 december 2013. retrieved 2 august 2013.

^ "archived copy" (pdf). archived (pdf) from the original on 24 december 2016. retrieved 16 august 2017.cs1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ "b-1b bombers are the aerial weapon of choice for supporting iraq's ramadi offensive". archived from the original on 16 august 2017. retrieved 16 august 2017.

^ "archived copy". archived from the original on 8 august 2017. retrieved 16 august 2017.cs1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ gorrell, mike. "northrop grumman celebrates bomber contract in utah". the salt lake tribune. archived from the original on 31 january 2016.

^ "photos: airtech cn-235 aircraft pictures". airliners.net. 23 december 2004. retrieved 30 august 2010.

^ "air force culture and conventional strategic airpower". stormingmedia.us. archived from the original on 29 june 2011. retrieved 30 august 2010.

^ thompson, mark (8 july 2013). "the air force's future may be in drones, but its generals won't be". time. archived from the original on 12 july 2013. retrieved 8 july 2013.

^ worden, michael (november 1997). "the rise of the fighter generals". dtic.mil. air university press. retrieved 12 march 2014.

^ barnes, julian e.; spiegel, peter (10 june 2008). "a different type of air force leader". los angeles times. retrieved 30 august 2010.

^ jaffe, greg (27 february 2010). "combat generation: drone operators climb on winds of change in the air force". the washington post. archived from the original on 16 june 2012. retrieved 30 august 2010.

^ everstine, brian (29 january 2014). "james: af is addressing 'systemic' problem in nuclear force". airforcetimes.com. gannett government media. retrieved 29 january 2014.

^ magruder, jr., daniel l. (2009). "the us air force and irregular warfare: success as a hurdle" (pdf). small wars journal. archived (pdf) from the original on 4 march 2016. retrieved 15 october 2015.

^ "understanding airmen: a primer for soldiers" (pdf). archived (pdf) from the original on 11 january 2012. retrieved 13 december 2011.

^ "us air force lacks volunteers to operate drones". defense news. retrieved 1 april 2015.

^ whitlock, craig (13 november 2013). "drone combat missions may be scaled back eventually, air force chief says". the washington post. archived from the original on 28 july 2014. retrieved 14 may 2014.

^ wasserbly, daniel (12 may 2014). "auvsi 2014: usaf looking to refine rpa training regime, reduce accidents". janes.com. ihs jane's defence weekly. archived from the original on 14 may 2014. retrieved 14 may 2014.

^ cox, matthew (24 april 2014). "air force criticized for mismanaging drone program". military.com. a monster company. archived from the original on 28 july 2014. retrieved 14 may 2014.

^ scharre, paul (29 july 2014). "how to lose the robotics revolution". warontherocks.com. war on the rocks. archived from the original on 29 july 2014. retrieved 29 july 2014.

^ "a brief history of challenge coins". 26 september 2012.


external links[edit]

united states air forceat wikipedia's sister projects


definitions from wiktionary
media from wikimedia commons
news from wikinews
quotations from wikiquote
texts from wikisource
textbooks from wikibooks
resources from wikiversity



official
official usaf site
official usaf recruiting site
air force blue tube page on youtube.com
air force live official blog
other
searchable database of air force historical reports
usaf emblems
usaf communications troops
members of the us air force on rallypoint
aircraft investment plan, fiscal years (fy) 2011–2040, submitted with the fy 2011 budget
national commission on the structure of the air force: report to the president and the congress of the united states
works by or about united states air force at internet archive



preceded byunited states army air forces

 united states air force1947 - present

succeeded bycurrent


vteunited states air forceleadership
secretary of the air force
under secretary of the air force
chief of staff
vice chief of staff
chief master sergeant of the air force
four-star generals
house armed services committee
house subcommittee on tactical air and land forces
house armed services subcommittee on strategic forces
senate committee on armed services
senate subcommittee on airland
senate armed services subcommittee on strategic forces
structurecommands
reserve
air national guard
field operating agencies
installations
direct reporting units
district of washington
operational test and evaluation center
usaf academy
major commands
acc
aetc
afgsc
afmc
afrc
afspc
afsoc
amc
pacaf
usafe-afa
numbered air forces
first
second
third
fourth
fifth
seventh
eighth
ninth
tenth
eleventh
twelfth
fourteenth
seventeenth
eighteenth
nineteenth
twentieth
twenty-second
twenty-fourth
twenty-fifth
air forces central

wings
ang
groups
ang
squadrons
ang
security forces
civilian auxiliary: civil air patrol
personnel and training
airmen
rank
officers
enlisted
specialty code
aeronautical ratings
judge advocate general's corps
red horse
security forces
medical service
chief of chaplains
chief scientist
training: air force academy
officer training school
reserve officer training corps
basic training
airman leadership school
sere
fitness assessment
uniforms and equipment
awards and decorations
badges
equipment
uniforms
history and traditions
history
aeronautical division / aviation section / division of military aeronautics / army air service / army air corps / army air forces
"the u.s. air force"
air force band
airman's creed
core values
flag
symbol
memorial
national museum
women airforce service pilots
air force one
honor guard
thunderbirds
service numbers

 category
 united states air force portal

vteequipment of the united states air forceactive service &aircraft designationa - attack
a/oa-10a/c thunderbolt ii
ac-130h/u/j/w spectre/spooky ii/ghostrider/stinger ii
b - strategic bomber
b-1b lancer
b-2a spirit
b-52h stratofortress
c - cargo transport
c-5c galaxy
c-5m super galaxy
c-12c/d/f huron
c-17a globemaster iii
c-20b gulfstream iii
c-20h gulfstream iv
c-21a learjet
c-37a gulfstream v
c-40b/c clipper
c-130e/h/j/j-30 hercules
cv-22b osprey
e - special electronic
e-3b/c sentry
e-4b
e-8c joint stars
e-9a widget
e-11a bacn
ec-130h compass call
ec-130j commando solo
f - fighter
f-15c/d eagle
f-15e strike eagle
f-16c/d fighting falcon
f-22a raptor
f-35a lightning ii
h - search and rescue
hc-130p/n king
hc-130j combat king ii
hh-60g/mh-60g pave hawk
k - tanker
kc-10a extender
kc-135e/r/t stratotanker
l - cold weather
lc-130h
m - multi-mission
cv-22 osprey
mc-130e/h/j/p combat talon i/combat talon ii/commando ii/combat shadow
mc-12w liberty
o - observation
oc-135b open skies
q - remotely piloted
mq-9 reaper
rq-4a global hawk
rq-11b raven
rq-170 sentinel
rq-180
r - reconnaissance
rc-26b condor
rc-135s/u/v/w cobra ball/combat sent/rivet joint
scan eagle
ru-2s dragon lady
wasp iii
t - trainer
t-1a jayhawk
t-6a texan ii
(a)t-38a/b/c talon ii
tg-10b/c/d
tg-15a/b
diamond t-52a
u - utility
uh-1n iroquois
uh-1h/n/v huey
uv-18a/b twin otter
u-28a
v – vip/staff transport
vc-25a (air force one)
c-32a/b (air force two)
c-40b/c clipper
w – weather reconnaissance
wc-130j hercules
wc-135w constant phoenix
other/undesignated
an-26  (6th sos)
cn-235-100  (427th sos)
mi-8  (6th sos)
spacesystemslaunch vehicle
atlas v
delta iv
satellite
advanced extremely high frequency (aehf)
defense meteorological satellite program (dmsp)
defense satellite communications system (dscs)
defense support program (dsp)
global positioning system (gps)
milstar satellite communications system
space-based infrared system (sbirs)
wideband global satcom
groundsystemsc2
an/usq-163 falconer
an/gsq-272 sentinel
ground-basedradar
an/fpq-16 perimeter acquisition attack characterization system (parcs)
an/fps-123 early warning radar (ewr)
an/fps-132 upgraded early warning radar (uewr)
an/fps-85
an/fps-133 air force space surveillance system (afsss)
an/fsq-114 ground-based electro-optical deep space surveillance (geodss)
an/fsq-224 morón optical space surveillance (moss)
rapid attack, identification, detection, and reporting system (raidrs)
ground vehicle
hmmwv
lssv
r-5 refueler
r-9 refueler
r-11 refueler
c300
munitionsbomb
mk-82
mk-84
gbu-8
gbu-10 paveway ii
gbu-12 paveway ii
gbu-15
gbu-24 paveway iii
gbu-27 paveway iii
gbu-28
gbu-31 jdam
gbu-32 jdam
gbu-38 jdam
gbu-39 small diameter bomb
gbu-44/b viper strike
gbu-53/b small diameter bomb ii
gbu-54 laser jdam
cbu-87 combined effects munition
cbu-89 gator
cbu-97 sensor fuzed weapon
blu-109/b bomb
blu-116 bunker buster
b61 nuclear bomb
b83 nuclear bomb
gun
gau-8 avenger
m61 vulcan
gau-12
gau-13
gau-19
m240
l/60 bofors
m102
atk gau-23/a
m2 browning
minigun
missile
aim-7m sparrow
aim-9m/x sidewinder
lgm-30g minuteman iii
agm-65a/b/d/e/g/g2/h/k maverick
agm-84 harpoon
agm-84e standoff land attack missile
agm-84h/k standoff land attack missile - expanded response
agm-86b/c/d air-launched cruise missile (alcm)
agm-88a/b/c high-speed anti-radiation missile (harm)
agm-114 hellfire air-to-surface missile (asm)
aim-120b/c advanced medium-range air-to-air missile (amraam)
agm-130 powered standoff weapon
agm-154a joint standoff weapon (jsow)
agm-158 joint air-to-surface stand-off missile (jassm)
agm-176 griffin
zuni rocket
target
bqm-34 firebee
bqm-167 subscale aerial target
mqm-107 streaker
qf-4 aerial target
small armssidearm/pdw
m11 pistol
m9 pistol
m17 pistol
mp5 submachine gun
usaf pilot's survival knife
rifle/carbine
guu-5/p carbine
m4 carbine
m14 stand-off munitions disruptor (smud)
m16a2 rifle
m24 sniper weapon system
m107 long range sniper rifle
mk 14 mod 0 enhanced battle rifle
support/cqb
m60 machine gun
m2hb browning machine gun
m240b medium machine gun
m249 light machine gun
m1014 shotgun
remington 870 mcs shotgun
ordnance
m136 at4 light anti-tank weapon
m18a1 claymore mine
m67 fragmentation grenade
m72 light anti-tank weapon (law)
m79 grenade launcher
mk-19 automatic grenade launcher
uniforms &other equipment
airman battle uniform (abu)
airman combat uniform (acu)
flight suit
physical training uniform
service dress uniform
mess dress
cmu – 33a/p22p-18

vteunited states armed forces
 book
 portal
a
mc
n
af
cg
 category
a
mc
n
af
cg
navbox
a
mc
n
af
cg
leadership
commander-in-chief: president of the united states
secretary of defense
deputy secretary of defense
secretary of homeland security
deputy secretary of homeland security
joint chiefs of staff:
chairman
vice chairman
united states congress: committees on armed services:
senate
house
active duty four-star officers
united states military seniority
national security act of 1947
goldwater–nichols act
organizationservice departments
department of defense (secretary): army (secretary)
navy (secretary)
air force (secretary)
department of homeland security (secretary): coast guard
branches
army (chief of staff)
marine corps (commandant)
navy (chief of naval operations)
air force (chief of staff)
coast guard (commandant)
reserve components
reserves:
a
mc
n
af
cg
national guard:
a
af
civilian auxiliaries
military auxiliary radio system
merchant marine
civil air patrol
coast guard auxiliary
unified combatant command
africa
central
european
indo-pacific
northern
southern
cyber
special operations
strategic
transportation
structure
united states code
title 10
title 14
title 32
title 50
the pentagon
installations
units:
a
mc
n
af
cg
logistics
media
unit mottoes
operations and history
current deployments
conflicts
wars
timeline
history:
a
mc
n
af
cg
colonial
world war ii
civil affairs
officers' clubs
african americans
asian americans
buddhist americans
jewish americans
muslim americans
pakistani americans
sikh americans
historiography:
army center of military history
mc history division
naval history and heritage command
air force historical research agency
american official war artists:
army art program
af art program
personneltraining
meps
asvab
recruit training:
a
mc
n
af
cg
officer candidate school:
a
mc
n
af
warrant:
a
mc
service academies:
a (prep)
n (prep)
af (prep)
cg
merchant marine
rotc
a:ecp
mc/n
af
medical
other education
uniforms
uniforms:
a
mc
n
af
cg
awards & decorations:
inter-service
a
mc/n
af
cg
foreign
international
devices
badges:
identification
a
mc
n
af
cg
ranks
enlisted:
a
mc
n
af
cg
warrant officers
officer:
a
mc
n
af
cg
other
oath:
enlistment
office
creeds & codes:
code of conduct
nco
a
mc
n
af
cg
service numbers:
a
mc
n
af
cg
military occupational specialty/rating/air force specialty code
pay
uniform code of military justice
judge advocate general's corps
military health system/tricare
separation
veterans affairs
conscription
chiefs of chaplains:
a
mc
n
af
cg
equipment
a
mc:
vehicles
weapons
other
n
af
cg
land
individual weapons
crew-served weapons
vehicles (active)
sea
all watercraft
ships:
a
n (active)
af
cg
msc
weapons:
n
cg
reactors
air
aircraft
world war i
active
aircraft designation
missiles
helicopter arms
other
nuclear football
electronics (designations)
flags:
a
mc
n
af
cg
ensign
jack
guidons
food
wmds:
nuclear
biological
chemical


legend
a = army
mc = marine corps
n = navy
af = air force
cg = coast guard

vteunited states department of defense
headquarters: the pentagon
patrick m. shanahan, acting secretary & deputy secretary of defense
office of the secretary of defense.mw-parser-output .nobold{font-weight:normal}(including defense agencies and dod field activities)deputy secretary of defense
deputy's advisory working group
office of net assessment
special access program oversight committee
under secretary of defense  for acquisition, technology and logistics
director, defense research and engineering
defense advanced research projects agency
missile defense agency
defense contract management agency
defense logistics agency
defense technical information center
defense threat reduction agency
office of economic adjustment
defense acquisition university
defense acquisition board
under secretary of defense for policy
defense security cooperation agency
defense pow/mia accounting agency
defense policy board advisory committee
under secretary of defense (comptroller)
defense contract audit agency
defense finance and accounting service
under secretary of defensefor personnel and readiness
defense commissary agency
department of defense education activity
dod human resources activity
military health system
uniformed services university of the health sciences
defense equal opportunity management institute
under secretary of defensefor intelligence
defense intelligence agency
defense security service
defense information systems agency
national geospatial-intelligence agency
national reconnaissance office
national security agency (director)
assistant secretary of defense for public affairs
defense media activity (american forces press service, american forces radio and television service, stars and stripes, the pentagon channel)
general counsel of the department of defense
defense legal services agency
director of administration and management
pentagon force protection agency
washington headquarters services
military departmentsdepartment of the army
secretary of the army  the secretariat: under secretary of the army
assistant secretary for acquisition, logistics, and technology
assistant secretary for civil works
assistant secretary (financial management and comptroller)
assistant secretary of the army for installations, energy and environment
assistant secretary of the army for manpower and reserve affairs
general counsel of the army
the administrative assistant  the army staff: chief of staff of the army
vice chief of staff of the army
sergeant major of the army
deputy chief of staff g-8
chief of chaplains
judge advocate general
provost marshal general
surgeon general  u.s. army field organizations: see structure of the united states army
department of the navy
secretary of the navy  the secretariat: under secretary of the navy
assistant secretary of the navy (financial management and comptroller)
assistant secretary of the navy (installations and environment)
assistant secretary of the navy (manpower and reserve affairs)
assistant secretary of the navy (research, development and acquisitions)
general counsel of the navy
judge advocate general
naval criminal investigative service
naval inspector general  headquarters marine corps: commandant of the marine corps
assistant commandant of the marine corps
sergeant major of the marine corps
chaplain  u.s. marine corps field organizations: see organization of the united states marine corps  office of the chief of naval operations: chief of naval operations
vice chief of naval operations
master chief petty officer of the navy
director of naval reactors
chief of chaplains
chief of naval personnel
surgeon general united states navy field organizations: see structure of the united states navy
department of the air force
secretary of the air force  the secretariat: under secretary of the air force
assistant secretary of the air force (acquisition)
assistant secretary of the air force (financial management & comptroller)
assistant secretary of the air force (installations, environment & logistics)
assistant secretary of the air force (manpower & reserve affairs)
general counsel of the air force
air force office of special investigations  the air staff: chief of staff of the air force
vice chief of staff of the air force
chief master sergeant of the air force
chief of chaplains
chief of safety
chief scientist
judge advocate general
surgeon general  u.s. air force field organizations: major commands
direct reporting units
field operating agencies
joint chiefs of staff
chairman of the joint chiefs of staff  vice chairman of the joint chiefs of staff
senior enlisted advisor to the chairman
joint requirements oversight council
director of the joint staff
joint staff
national military command center
alternate national military command center
national defense university
combatant commands
africa command
central command
european command
northern command
indo-pacific command
southern command
cyber command
special operations command
strategic command
transportation command
national guard bureau
chief of the national guard bureau
air national guard
army national guard
office of the inspector general
defense criminal investigative service

vtenato air forcesair forces
 albanian air force
 belgian air component
 bulgarian air force
 royal canadian air force
 croatian air force and air defence
 czech air force

royal danish air force
danish air force home guard
 estonian air force

french air force
french air gendarmerie

german air force
german cyber and information domain service
 hellenic air force
 hungarian air force
 italian air force
 latvian air force

lithuanian air force
lithuanian special operations force air force special operations element
 montenegrin air force
 royal netherlands air force

royal norwegian air force
norwegian cyber defence force
 polish air force
 portuguese air force
 romanian air force
 slovak air force
 slovenian air force and air defence

spanish air force
spanish royal guard "plus ultra" squadron
 turkish air force
 royal air force
 united states air force
maritime forces aviation
 bulgarian naval aviation
 french naval aviation
 german naval aviation
 navy aviation command
 icelandic coast guard aeronautical division

italian navy aviation
italian coast guard air service
 netherlands naval aviation service
 polish naval aviation brigade
 portuguese naval aviation
 romanian naval forces aviation
 spanish naval air arm

turkish naval forces aviation command
turkish coast guard aviation command
 fleet air arm

united states marine corps aviation
united states naval air forces
united states coast guard aviation
land forces aviation

french army light aviation
national gendarmerie aviation
 german army aviation corps
 hellenic army aviation

italian army aviation command
aerial service of the carabinieri corps
 lithuanian national defence volunteer forces, aviation unit
 polish land forces aviation
 spanish army airmobile force

turkish land forces aviation command
turkish gendarmerie aviation command
 army air corps
 united states army aviation branch

vtelist of air forces
abkhazia
afghanistan
albania
algeria
angola
argentina
armenia
australia
austria
azerbaijan
bahamas
bahrain
bangladesh
barbados
belarus
belgium
belize
benin
bolivia
bosnia and herzegovina
botswana
brazil
brunei
bulgaria
burkina faso
cambodia
cameroon
canada
central african republic
chad
chile
china
colombia
comoros
congo
congo dr
croatia
cuba
cyprus
czech republic
denmark
djibouti
dominican republic
ecuador
egypt
el salvador
eritrea
estonia
ethiopia
finland
france
gambia
georgia
germany
ghana
greece
guatemala
guinea-bissau
haiti
honduras
hungary
iceland
india
indonesia
iran
iraq
ireland
israel
italy
ivory coast
japan
jordan
kazakhstan
kenya
kuwait
kyrgyzstan
laos
latvia
lebanon
liberia
libya
liechtenstein
lithuania
macedonia
madagascar
malaysia
malta
mauritania
mexico
moldova
monaco
mongolia
montenegro
morocco
myanmar
namibia
netherlands
new zealand
nicaragua
nigeria
north korea
norway
oman
pakistan
paraguay
peru
philippines
poland
portugal
qatar
romania
russia
rwanda
san marino
saudi arabia
senegal
serbia
sierra leone
singapore
slovakia
slovenia
somalia
south africa
south korea
south sudan
spain
sri lanka
sudan
suriname
sweden
switzerland
syria
taiwan
tajikistan
tanzania
thailand
togo
tunisia
turkey
turkmenistan
uganda
ukraine
united arab emirates
united kingdom
united states
uruguay
uzbekistan
venezuela
vietnam
yemen
zambia
zimbabwe

authority control 
bnf: cb11880870q (data)
gnd: 872-2
isni: 0000 0004 0478 7146
lccn: n79126811
nkc: kn20030912001
selibr: 302344
sudoc: 077354907
viaf: 142489267
 worldcat identities (via viaf): 142489267






 
						retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=united_states_air_force&oldid=882939783"					
categories: military units and formations established in 1947the pentagonuniformed services of the united statesunited states air forceunited states department of defense1947 establishments in the united statescollier trophy recipientsunited states armed forces service brancheshidden categories: webarchive template wayback linkscs1 maint: archived copy as titleall articles with dead external linksarticles with dead external links from august 2017articles with short descriptionarticles with haudio microformatsarticles containing potentially dated statements from 2017all articles containing potentially dated statementsarticles needing additional references from january 2018all articles needing additional referencesarticles with internet archive linkswikipedia articles with bnf identifierswikipedia articles with gnd identifierswikipedia articles with isni identifierswikipedia articles with lccn identifierswikipedia articles with nkc identifierswikipedia articles with selibr identifierswikipedia articles with sudoc identifierswikipedia articles with viaf identifierswikipedia articles with worldcat-viaf identifiersuse dmy dates from july 2018 



navigation menu


personal tools

not logged intalkcontributionscreate accountlog in 



namespaces

articletalk 




variants







views

readeditview history 



more





search



 







navigation


main pagecontentsfeatured contentcurrent eventsrandom articledonate to wikipediawikipedia store 



interaction


helpabout wikipediacommunity portalrecent changescontact page 



tools


what links hererelated changesupload filespecial pagespermanent linkpage informationwikidata itemcite this page 



print/export


create a bookdownload as pdfprintable version 



in other projects


wikimedia commons 



languages


afrikaansالعربيةasturianuবাংলাbân-lâm-gúбеларускаябългарскиbosanskibrezhonegcatalàčeštinacymraegdanskdeutscheestiελληνικάespañolesperantoeuskaraفارسیfrançaisfryskgalego한국어հայերենहिन्दीhrvatskibahasa indonesiaitalianoעבריתქართულიlatviešulëtzebuergeschlietuviųmagyarმარგალურიbahasa melayunederlands日本語norsknorsk nynorskoccitanپنجابیpolskiportuguêsromânăрусскийscotssimple englishslovenčinaslovenščinaсрпски / srpskisrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиsuomisvenskaதமிழ்ไทยtürkçeукраїнськаاردوtiếng việt吴语ייִדישyorùbá粵語中文 
edit links 





 this page was last edited on 12 february 2019, at 08:22 (utc).
text is available under the creative commons attribution-sharealike license;
additional terms may apply.  by using this site, you agree to the terms of use and privacy policy. wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the wikimedia foundation, inc., a non-profit organization.


privacy policy
about wikipedia
disclaimers
contact wikipedia
developers
cookie statement
mobile view



 

 



(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgpageparsereport":{"limitreport":{"cputime":"1.840","walltime":"2.375","ppvisitednodes":{"value":12001,"limit":1000000},"ppgeneratednodes":{"value":0,"limit":1500000},"postexpandincludesize":{"value":587995,"limit":2097152},"templateargumentsize":{"value":19068,"limit":2097152},"expansiondepth":{"value":13,"limit":40},"expensivefunctioncount":{"value":17,"limit":500},"unstrip-depth":{"value":1,"limit":20},"unstrip-size":{"value":214022,"limit":5000000},"entityaccesscount":{"value":1,"limit":400},"timingprofile":["100.00% 1455.577      1 -total"," 34.53%  502.676      1 template:reflist"," 19.17%  279.025     14 template:military_navigation"," 18.90%  275.096     52 template:cite_web"," 11.39%  165.800      1 template:infobox_military_unit"," 11.04%  160.696     52 template:flagicon"," 10.39%  151.162      1 template:nato_air_forces"," 10.25%  149.199      1 template:infobox","  5.10%   74.212      1 template:authority_control","  5.09%   74.157      1 template:refimprove_section"]},"scribunto":{"limitreport-timeusage":{"value":"0.587","limit":"10.000"},"limitreport-memusage":{"value":13426526,"limit":52428800}},"cachereport":{"origin":"mw1325","timestamp":"20190215034650","ttl":2073600,"transientcontent":false}}});mw.config.set({"wgbackendresponsetime":2532,"wghostname":"mw1325"});});


