



united nations general assembly - wikipedia
document.documentelement.classname = document.documentelement.classname.replace( /(^|\s)client-nojs(\s|$)/, "$1client-js$2" );
(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgcanonicalnamespace":"","wgcanonicalspecialpagename":false,"wgnamespacenumber":0,"wgpagename":"united_nations_general_assembly","wgtitle":"united nations general assembly","wgcurrevisionid":883801538,"wgrevisionid":883801538,"wgarticleid":31957,"wgisarticle":true,"wgisredirect":false,"wgaction":"view","wgusername":null,"wgusergroups":["*"],"wgcategories":["webarchive template wayback links","articles with french-language external links","use british english oxford spelling from october 2018","use dmy dates from october 2018","articles containing french-language text","articles needing additional references from january 2017","all articles needing additional references","all articles with unsourced statements","articles with unsourced statements from october 2010","commons category link from wikidata","wikipedia articles with bibsys identifiers","wikipedia articles with bne identifiers","wikipedia articles with bnf identifiers","wikipedia articles with gnd identifiers","wikipedia articles with isni identifiers","wikipedia articles with lccn identifiers","wikipedia articles with nkc identifiers","wikipedia articles with nla identifiers","wikipedia articles with selibr identifiers","wikipedia articles with snac-id identifiers","wikipedia articles with sudoc identifiers","wikipedia articles with viaf identifiers","wikipedia articles with worldcat-viaf identifiers","united nations general assembly","united nations organs","organizations established in 1945","1945 establishments in new york (state)"],"wgbreakframes":false,"wgpagecontentlanguage":"en","wgpagecontentmodel":"wikitext","wgseparatortransformtable":["",""],"wgdigittransformtable":["",""],"wgdefaultdateformat":"dmy","wgmonthnames":["","january","february","march","april","may","june","july","august","september","october","november","december"],"wgmonthnamesshort":["","jan","feb","mar","apr","may","jun","jul","aug","sep","oct","nov","dec"],"wgrelevantpagename":"united_nations_general_assembly","wgrelevantarticleid":31957,"wgrequestid":"xgvhyqpaaeuaag85sisaaaaa","wgcspnonce":false,"wgisprobablyeditable":true,"wgrelevantpageisprobablyeditable":true,"wgrestrictionedit":[],"wgrestrictionmove":[],"wgredirectedfrom":"un_general_assembly","wgflaggedrevsparams":{"tags":{}},"wgstablerevisionid":null,"wgcategorytreepagecategoryoptions":"{\"mode\":0,\"hideprefix\":20,\"showcount\":true,\"namespaces\":false}","wgwikieditorenabledmodules":[],"wgbetafeaturesfeatures":[],"wgmediavieweronclick":true,"wgmediaviewerenabledbydefault":true,"wgpopupsshouldsendmoduletouser":true,"wgpopupsconflictswithnavpopupgadget":false,"wgvisualeditor":{"pagelanguagecode":"en","pagelanguagedir":"ltr","pagevariantfallbacks":"en","usepageimages":true,"usepagedescriptions":true},"wgmfispagecontentmodeleditable":true,"wgmfenablefontchanger":true,"wgmfdisplaywikibasedescriptions":{"search":true,"nearby":true,"watchlist":true,"tagline":false},"wgrelatedarticles":null,"wgrelatedarticlesusecirrussearch":true,"wgrelatedarticlesonlyusecirrussearch":false,"wgwmeschemaeditattemptstepoversample":false,"wgpoweredbyhhvm":true,"wgulscurrentautonym":"english","wgnoticeproject":"wikipedia","wgcentralnoticecookiestodelete":[],"wgcentralnoticecategoriesusinglegacy":["fundraising","fundraising"],"wginternalredirecttargeturl":"/wiki/united_nations_general_assembly","wgwikibaseitemid":"q47423","wgscorenotelanguages":{"arabic":"العربية","catalan":"català","deutsch":"deutsch","english":"english","espanol":"español","italiano":"italiano","nederlands":"nederlands","norsk":"norsk","portugues":"português","suomi":"suomi","svenska":"svenska","vlaams":"west-vlams"},"wgscoredefaultnotelanguage":"nederlands","wgcentralauthmobiledomain":false,"wgcodemirrorenabled":true,"wgvisualeditortoolbarscrolloffset":0,"wgvisualeditorunsupportededitparams":["undo","undoafter","veswitched"],"wgeditsubmitbuttonlabelpublish":true,"oreswikiid":"enwiki","oresbaseurl":"http://ores.discovery.wmnet:8081/","oresapiversion":3});mw.loader.state({"ext.gadget.charinsert-styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site.styles":"ready","site.styles":"ready","noscript":"ready","user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site":"ready","user":"ready","user.options":"ready","user.tokens":"loading","ext.cite.styles":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.shared":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.commonprint":"ready","mediawiki.toc.styles":"ready","wikibase.client.init":"ready","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.noscript":"ready","ext.uls.interlanguage":"ready","ext.wikimediabadges":"ready","ext.3d.styles":"ready","mediawiki.skinning.interface":"ready","skins.vector.styles":"ready"});mw.loader.implement("user.tokens@0tffind",function($,jquery,require,module){/*@nomin*/mw.user.tokens.set({"edittoken":"+\\","patroltoken":"+\\","watchtoken":"+\\","csrftoken":"+\\"});
});rlpagemodules=["mediawiki.action.view.redirect","ext.cite.ux-enhancements","site","mediawiki.page.startup","mediawiki.page.ready","mediawiki.toc","mediawiki.searchsuggest","ext.gadget.teahouse","ext.gadget.referencetooltips","ext.gadget.watchlist-notice","ext.gadget.drn-wizard","ext.gadget.charinsert","ext.gadget.reftoolbar","ext.gadget.extra-toolbar-buttons","ext.gadget.switcher","ext.centralauth.centralautologin","mmv.head","mmv.bootstrap.autostart","ext.popups","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.init","ext.visualeditor.targetloader","ext.eventlogging","ext.wikimediaevents","ext.navigationtiming","ext.uls.eventlogger","ext.uls.init","ext.uls.compactlinks","ext.uls.interface","ext.quicksurveys.init","ext.centralnotice.geoip","ext.centralnotice.startup","skins.vector.js"];mw.loader.load(rlpagemodules);});























 





united nations general assembly 
from wikipedia, the free encyclopedia   (redirected from un general assembly)
 jump to navigation
jump to search


united nations general assemblyunited nations (un) general assembly hall at the un headquarters, new york cityabbreviationgaungaagformation1945; 74 years ago (1945)typeprincipal organlegal statusactiveheadpresident: maría fernanda espinosaparent organizationunited nationswebsiteun.org/ga


membership and participation



for two articles dealing with membership of and participation in the general assembly, see:

general assembly members
general assembly observers

the united nations general assembly (unga or  ga; french: assemblée générale, ag) is one of the six principal organs of the united nations (un), the only one in which all member nations have equal representation, and the main deliberative, policy-making, and representative organ of the un. its powers are to oversee the budget of the un, appoint the non-permanent members to the security council, appoint the secretary-general of the united nations, receive reports from other parts of the un, and make recommendations in the form of general assembly resolutions.[1] it has also established numerous subsidiary organs.[2]
the general assembly currently meets under its president or secretary-general in annual sessions at the headquarters of the united nations in new york city, the main part of which lasts from september[3] to december and part of january until all issues are addressed (which often is just before the next session's start). it can also reconvene for special and emergency special sessions. its composition, functions, powers, voting, and procedures are set out in chapter iv of the united nations charter. the first session was convened on 10 january 1946 in the methodist central hall in london and included representatives of 51 nations.
voting in the general assembly on certain important questions, namely, recommendations on peace and security, budgetary concerns, and the election, admission, suspension or expulsion of members is by a two-thirds majority of those present and voting. other questions are decided by a straightforward majority. each member country has one vote. apart from approval of budgetary matters, including adoption of a scale of assessment, assembly resolutions are not binding on the members. the assembly may make recommendations on any matters within the scope of the un, except matters of peace and security under security council consideration.[4] the one state, one vote power structure potentially allows states comprising just five percent of the world population to pass a resolution by a two-thirds vote.[5]
during the 1980s, the assembly became a forum for the "north-south dialogue": the discussion of issues between industrialized nations and developing countries. these issues came to the fore because of the phenomenal growth and changing makeup of the un membership. in 1945, the un had 51 members. it now has 193, of which more than two-thirds are developing countries. because of their numbers, developing countries are often able to determine the agenda of the assembly (using coordinating groups like the g77), the character of its debates, and the nature of its decisions. for many developing countries, the un is the source of much of their diplomatic influence and the principal outlet for their foreign relations initiatives.
although the resolutions passed by the general assembly do not have the binding forces over the member nations (apart from budgetary measures), pursuant to its uniting for peace resolution of november 1950 (resolution 377 (v)), the assembly may also take action if the security council fails to act, owing to the negative vote of a permanent member, in a case where there appears to be a threat to the peace, breach of the peace or act of aggression. the assembly can consider the matter immediately with a view to making recommendations to members for collective measures to maintain or restore international peace and security.[4]

contents

1 history
2 membership
3 agenda
4 resolutions

4.1 resolution numbering scheme


5 unga budget
6 elections
7 special sessions (ungass)

7.1 ungass 2016
7.2 other special sessions
7.3 general debates


8 emergency special sessions
9 subsidiary organs

9.1 committees

9.1.1 main committees
9.1.2 other committees


9.2 commissions
9.3 boards

9.3.1 executive boards
9.3.2 boards


9.4 councils and panels
9.5 working groups and other


10 seating
11 reform and unpa
12 sidelines of the general assembly
13 see also
14 references
15 external links


history[edit]
 methodist central hall, london, the location of the first meeting of the united nations general assembly in 1946.[6]
the first session of the un general assembly was convened on 10 january 1946 in the methodist central hall in london and included representatives of 51 nations. the next few annual sessions were held in different cities: the second session in new york city, and the third in paris. it moved to the permanent headquarters of the united nations in new york city at the start of its seventh regular annual session, on 14 october 1952. in december 1988, in order to hear yasser arafat, the general assembly organized its 29th session in the palace of nations, in geneva, switzerland.[7]

membership[edit]
main article: member states of the united nations
all 193 members of the united nations are members of the general assembly, with the addition of holy see and palestine as observer states. further, the united nations general assembly may grant observer status to an international organization or entity, which entitles the entity to participate in the work of the united nations general assembly, though with limitations.

agenda[edit]
the agenda for each session is planned up to seven months in advance and begins with the release of a preliminary list of items to be included in the provisional agenda.[8] this is refined into a provisional agenda 60 days before the opening of the session. after the session begins, the final agenda is adopted in a plenary meeting which allocates the work to the various main committees, who later submit reports back to the assembly for adoption by consensus or by vote.
items on the agenda are numbered. regular plenary sessions of the general assembly in recent years have initially been scheduled to be held over the course of just three months; however, additional work loads have extended these sessions until just short of the next session. the routinely scheduled portions of the sessions normally commence on "the tuesday of the third week in september, counting from the first week that contains at least one working day", per the un rules of procedure.[9] the last two of these regular sessions were routinely scheduled to recess exactly three months afterwards[10] in early december, but were resumed in january and extended until just before the beginning of the following sessions.[11]

resolutions[edit]
this section needs additional citations for verification. please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed.find sources: "united nations general assembly" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · jstor (january 2017) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
see also: united nations general assembly resolution and united nations document codes
 russian president dmitry medvedev addresses the 64th session of the un general assembly on 24 september 2009
the general assembly votes on many resolutions brought forth by sponsoring states. these are generally statements symbolizing the sense of the international community about an array of world issues. most general assembly resolutions are not enforceable as a legal or practical matter, because the general assembly lacks enforcement powers with respect to most issues. the general assembly has authority to make final decisions in some areas such as the united nations budget.[12]
general assembly resolutions are generally non-binding on member states, but carry considerable political weight, and are legally binding towards the operations of the general assembly. the general assembly can also refer an issue to the security council to put in place a binding resolution.[13]

resolution numbering scheme[edit]
from the first to the thirtieth general assembly sessions, all general assembly resolutions were numbered consecutively, with the resolution number followed by the session number in roman numbers (for example, resolution 1514 (xv), which was the 1514th numbered resolution adopted by the assembly, and was adopted at the fifteenth regular session (1960)). beginning in the thirty-first session, resolutions are numbered by individual session (for example resolution 41/10 represents the 10th resolution adopted at the forty-first session).

unga budget[edit]
the general assembly also approves the budget of the united nations and decides how much money each member state must pay to run the organization.[5]
the charter of the united nations gives responsibility for approving the budget to the general assembly (chapter iv, article 17) and for preparing the budget to the secretary-general, as "chief administrative officer" (chapter xv, article 97). the charter also addresses the non-payment of assessed contributions (chapter iv, article 19).
the planning, programming, budgeting, monitoring and evaluation cycle of the united nations has evolved over the years; major resolutions on the process include general assembly resolutions: 41/213 of 19 december 1986, 42/211 of 21 december 1987, and 45/248 of 21 december 1990.[14]
the budget covers the costs of united nations programmes in areas such as political affairs, international justice and law, international cooperation for development, public information, human rights, and humanitarian affairs.
the main source of funds for the regular budget is the contributions of member states. the scale of assessments is based on the capacity of countries to pay. this is determined by considering their relative shares of total gross national product, adjusted to take into account a number of factors, including their per capita incomes.
in addition to the regular budget, member states are assessed for the costs of the international tribunals and, in accordance with a modified version of the basic scale, for the costs of peacekeeping operations.[15]

elections[edit]
 division of the general assembly by membership in the five united nations regional groups.   the african group   the asia-pacific group    the middle and eastern european group   the latin american and caribbean states (grulac)   the western european and others group (weog)   no group
the general assembly votes in elections for the ten non-permanent members of the united nations security council;[16] the most recent such election was on 2 june 2017. these elections take place every year, and member states serve two-year terms, with five replaced each year. the candidates are selected by their regional groups. the general assembly also elects members of the united nations economic and social council. it also elects members of the united nations industrial development organization, and some members of the united nations trusteeship council. the general assembly appoints the secretary-general of the united nations on recommendation of the security council, and adopts rules governing the administration of the secretariat. along with the security council, the general assembly elects judges for the international court of justice in the hague.[17]

special sessions (ungass)[edit]
 spanish prime minister josé luis rodríguez zapatero addressing the general assembly in new york, 20 september 2005
special sessions may be convened at the request of the united nations security council, or a majority of un members,[18] or, if the majority concurs, of a single member. a special session was held on october 1995 at the head of government level to commemorate the un's 50th anniversary. another special session was held in september 2000 to celebrate the millennium; it put forward the millennium development goals. a special session was again held to discuss and admit proposals for the hiv/aids crisis in 2001.[19] a further special session (2005 world summit) was held in september 2005 to commemorate the un's 60th anniversary; it assessed progress on the millennium development goals, and discussed kofi annan's in larger freedom proposals. another special session was held in 2014 to discuss population and development, following the international conference on population and development programme of action.[20]

ungass 2016[edit]
a special session was held in 2016 to discuss the war on drugs and proposals to reconsider international drug treaties like the single convention on narcotic drugs, as well as how to deal with drug treatment, rehabilitation, and related matters.[21] this was the first un gathering on the subject in 20 years. in 2016, while "some european and south american countries as well as the u.s. favored softer approaches[,] ... countries such as china and russia and most muslim nations like iran, indonesia and pakistan remained staunchly opposed" to any move beyond prohibition. one group favouring reform, the global commission on drug policy, and some attendees, expressed disappointment with the "status quo" outcome.[22]
presenters included russel simmons, michael skolnik, che rhymefest smith, who screened the film waronus, directed by queen muhammad ali and hakeem khaaliq.[23][24]

 brazilian president dilma rousseff delivers the opening speech at the 66th session of the general assembly on 21 september 2011, marking the first time a woman opened a united nations session.[25]
other special sessions[edit]
at the first special session of the un general assembly held in 1947, osvaldo aranha, then president of the special session, began a tradition that has remained until today whereby the first speaker at this major international forum is always a brazilian.[26]
if the security council fails to act to maintain international peace and security due to a disagreement between its permanent members, the general assembly has the power to convene an emergency special session and act to ensure peace and security under united nations general assembly resolution 377.

general debates[edit]
annually, heads of state, government or heads of delegations speak at the opening of the new session of the general assembly during the "general debate".[27][28][29]

emergency special sessions[edit]
the general assembly may take action on maintaining international peace and security if the united nations security council is unable, usually due to disagreement among the permanent members, to exercise its primary responsibility. if not in session at the time, the general assembly may meet in emergency special session[30] within 24 hours of the request. such emergency special sessions are to be called if requested by the un security council on the vote of any seven members, or by a majority of the members of the united nations.
the "uniting for peace" resolution, adopted 3 november 1950, empowered the assembly to convene in emergency special session in order to recommend collective measures, including the use of armed force, in the event of a breach of the peace or an act of aggression. as with all assembly resolutions, two-thirds of un members "present and voting" must approve any such recommendation before it can be formally adopted by the assembly. emergency special sessions have been convened under this procedure on ten occasions. the two most recent, in 1982 and 1997–2017, were about the status of the territories occupied[31] by the state of israel.

subsidiary organs[edit]
 the united nations general assembly building
 panorama of the unga
the general assembly subsidiary organs are divided into five categories: committees (30 total, six main), commissions (six), boards (seven), councils (four) and panels (one), working groups, and "other".

committees[edit]
main committees[edit]
the main committees are ordinally numbered, 1–6:[32]

the first committee: disarmament and international security (disec) is concerned with disarmament and related international security questions
the second committee: economic and financial (ecofin) is concerned with economic questions
the third committee: social, cultural, and humanitarian (sochum) deals with social and humanitarian issues
the fourth committee: special political and decolonisation (specpol) deals with a variety of political subjects not dealt with by the first committee, as well as with decolonization
the fifth committee: administrative and budgetary and general deals with the administration and budget of the united nations
the sixth committee: legal deals with legal matters
the roles of many of the main committees have changed over time. until the late 1970s, the first committee was the political and security committee (polisec) and there was also a sufficient number of additional "political" matters that an additional, unnumbered main committee, called the special political committee, also sat. the fourth committee formerly handled trusteeship and decolonization matters. with the decreasing number of such matters to be addressed as the trust territories attained independence and the decolonization movement progressed, the functions of the special political committee were merged into the fourth committee during the 1990s.
each main committee consists of all the members of the general assembly. each elects a chairman, three vice chairmen, and a rapporteur at the outset of each regular general assembly session.

other committees[edit]
 soviet general secretary mikhail gorbachev addresses the un general assembly in december 1988
these are not numbered. according to the general assembly website, the most important are: [32]

credentials committee – this committee is charged with ensuring that the diplomatic credentials of all un representatives are in order. the credentials committee consists of nine member states elected early in each regular general assembly session.
general committee – this is a supervisory committee entrusted with ensuring that the whole meeting of the assembly goes smoothly. the general committee consists of the president and vice presidents of the current general assembly session and the chairman of each of the six main committees.
other committees of the general assembly are enumerated.[33]

commissions[edit]
there are six commissions: [34]

united nations disarmament commission, established by ga resolution 502 (vi) and s-10/2
international civil service commission, established by ga resolution 3357 (xxix)
international law commission, established by ga resolution 174 (ii)
united nations commission on international trade law (uncitral), established by ga resolution 2205 (xxi)
united nations conciliation commission for palestine, established by ga resolution 194 (iii)
united nations peacebuilding commission, established by ga resolution 60/180 and un security council resolutions 1645 (2005) and 1646 (2005)
despite its name, the former united nations commission on human rights (unchr) was actually a subsidiary body of ecosoc.

boards[edit]
there are seven boards which are categorized into two groups:
a) executive boards and b) boards [35]

executive boards[edit]
executive board of the united nations children's fund, established by ga resolution 57 (i) and 48/162
executive board of the united nations development programme and of the united nations population fund, established by ga resolution 2029 (xx) and 48/162
executive board of the world food programme, established by ga resolution 50/8
boards[edit]
board of auditors, established by ga resolution 74 (i)
trade and development board, established by ga resolution 1995 (xix)
united nations joint staff pension board, established by ga resolution 248 (iii)
advisory board on disarmament matters, established by ga resolution 37/99 k
councils and panels[edit]
the newest council is the united nations human rights council, which replaced the aforementioned unchr in march 2006.
there are a total of four councils and one panel.[36]

working groups and other[edit]
there is a varied group of working groups and other subsidiary bodies.[37]

seating[edit]
countries are seated alphabetically in the general assembly according to english translations of the countries' names. the country which occupies the front-most left position is determined annually by the secretary-general via ballot draw. the remaining countries follow alphabetically after it.[38]

reform and unpa[edit]
main article: reform of the united nations
see also: united nations parliamentary assembly
on 21 march 2005, secretary-general kofi annan presented a report, in larger freedom, that criticized the general assembly for focusing so much on consensus that it was passing watered-down resolutions reflecting "the lowest common denominator of widely different opinions".[39] he also criticized the assembly for trying to address too broad an agenda, instead of focusing on "the major substantive issues of the day, such as international migration and the long-debated comprehensive convention on terrorism". annan recommended streamlining the general assembly's agenda, committee structure, and procedures; strengthening the role and authority of its president; enhancing the role of civil society; and establishing a mechanism to review the decisions of its committees, in order to minimize unfunded mandates and micromanagement of the united nations secretariat. annan reminded un members of their responsibility to implement reforms, if they expect to realize improvements in un effectiveness.[40]
the reform proposals were not taken up by the united nations world summit in september 2005. instead, the summit solely affirmed the central position of the general assembly as the chief deliberative, policymaking and representative organ of the united nations, as well as the advisory role of the assembly in the process of standard-setting and the codification of international law. the summit also called for strengthening the relationship between the general assembly and the other principal organs to ensure better coordination on topical issues that required coordinated action by the united nations, in accordance with their respective mandates.[citation needed]
a united nations parliamentary assembly, or united nations people's assembly (unpa), is a proposed addition to the united nations system that eventually could allow for direct election of un parliament members by citizens all over the world.
in the general debate of the 65th general assembly, jorge valero, representing venezuela, said "the united nations has exhausted its model and it is not simply a matter of proceeding with reform, the twenty-first century demands deep changes that are only possible with a rebuilding of this organisation." he pointed to the futility of resolutions concerning the cuban embargo and the middle east conflict as reasons for the un model having failed. venezuela also called for the suspension of veto rights in the security council because it was a "remnant of the second world war [it] is incompatible with the principle of sovereign equality of states".[41]
reform of the united nations general assembly includes proposals to change the powers and composition of the u.n. general assembly. this could include, for example, tasking the assembly with evaluating how well member states implement unga resolutions,[42] increasing the power of the assembly vis-à-vis the united nations security council, or making debates more constructive and less repetitive.[43]

sidelines of the general assembly[edit]
the annual session of the united nations general assembly is accompanied by independent meetings between world leaders, better known as meetings taking place on the sidelines of the assembly meeting. the diplomatic congregation has also since evolved into a week attracting wealthy and influential individuals from around the world to new york city to address various agendas, ranging from humanitarian and environmental to business and political.[44]

see also[edit]
history of the united nations
list of current permanent representatives to the united nations
reform of the united nations
united nations interpretation service
united nations system
references[edit]


^ charter of the united nations: chapter iv archived 12 october 2007 at the wayback machine. united nations.

^ general assembly: subsidiary organs at un.org.

^ united nations official document. "the annual session convenes on tuesday of the third week in september per resolution 57/301, para. 1. the opening debate begins the following tuesday". www.un.org..mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/65/lock-green.svg/9px-lock-green.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d6/lock-gray-alt-2.svg/9px-lock-gray-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/aa/lock-red-alt-2.svg/9px-lock-red-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration{color:#555}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration span{border-bottom:1px dotted;cursor:help}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/wikisource-logo.svg/12px-wikisource-logo.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output code.cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:inherit;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#33aa33;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-right{padding-right:0.2em}

^ a b general assembly of the united nations. united nations. retrieved 12 july 2013.

^ a b population, total | data | table. world bank. retrieved 12 july 2013.

^ "history of united nations 1941 – 1950". united nations. archived from the original on 12 march 2015. retrieved 12 march 2015.

^ (in french) "genève renoue avec sa tradition de ville de paix", le temps, thursday 16 january 2014.

^ "research guide: general assembly". united nations. archived from the original on 21 october 2013.

^ "general assembly of the united nations".

^ general assembly adopts work programme for sixty-fourth session, un general assembly adopts work programme for sixty-fourth session

^ un plenary meetings of the 64th session of the un general assembly, general assembly of the un

^ "article 17 (1) of charter of the united nations".

^ "articles 11 (2) and 11 (3) of charter of the united nations".

^ un security council : resolutions, presidential statements, meeting records, sc press releases archived 2 december 2012 at the wayback machine. united nations. retrieved 12 july 2013.

^ united nations department of management. united nations. retrieved 12 july 2013.

^ "articles 18 (2) and 23 (1) of charter of the united nations".

^ grolier: the new book of knowledge (encyclopedia), book u/v, article: united nations (pg. 65), article by leland goodrich

^ "article 20 of charter of the united nations".

^ "un ga special session on hiv/aids". united nations. retrieved 16 december 2015.

^ "event: special session of the general assembly on the follow-up to the programme of action of the icpd | sustainable development policy & practice | iisd reporting services". sd.iisd.org. retrieved 16 december 2015.

^ "special session of the general assembly ungass 2016". unodc.org. retrieved 16 december 2015.

^ fassihi, farnaz, "u.n. conference on drugs ends without shift in policy", wall street journal, 22 april 2016. retrieved 25 april 2016.

^ belk, joey (19 march 2016). "how to travel in one of the most dangerous cities in the world and still be fresh". nation19 magazine / apdta. nation19 magazine / apdta. retrieved 2 february 2017.

^ "the museum of drug policy wants you to speak your truth | mass appeal". mass appeal. 20 april 2016. retrieved 3 february 2017.

^ "brazil's president rousseff to be first woman to open united nations". fox news channel. 20 september 2011. retrieved 29 september 2015.

^ "historical personalities and diplomats: oswaldo aranha". brazilian ministry of external relations.

^ "thailand's name picked to set seating arrangement for general assembly session". united nations. 2 august 2005.

^ "un: king felipe vi of spain and ban ki-moon discuss western sahara". morocco world news. 24 september 2014. retrieved 25 september 2014.

^ "in u.n. speech, obama vows to fight isis 'network of death'". the new york times. 24 september 2014. retrieved 25 september 2014.

^ unga emergency special sessions. united nations.

^ tenth emergency special session. united nations. retrieved 13 november 2014.

^ a b "main committees". united nations general assembly. united nations. retrieved 19 june 2018.

^ "subsidiary organs of the general assembly: committees". united nations general assembly. united nations. retrieved 19 june 2018.

^ "subsidiary organs of the general assembly: commissions". united nations general assembly. united nations. retrieved 19 june 2018.

^ "subsidiary organs of the general assembly: boards". united nations general assembly. united nations. retrieved 19 june 2018.

^ "subsidiary organs of the general assembly: assemblies and councils". united nations general assembly. united nations. retrieved 19 june 2018.

^ "subsidiary organs of the general assembly: working groups". united nations general assembly. united nations. retrieved 19 june 2018.

^ the pga handbook: a practical guide to the united nations general assembly (pdf). permanent mission of switzerland to the united nations. 2011. p. 18. isbn 978-0-615-49660-3.

^ "report of the secretary-general in larger freedom towards development, security and human rights for all".

^ "in larger freedom, chapter 5". united nations.

^ assembly, general. "venezuela, bolivarian republic of h.e. mr. jorge valero briceño, chairman of the delegation". www.un.org.

^ "revitalization of the work of the general assembly" (pdf). globalpolicy.org. retrieved 11 january 2015.

^ "the role of the un general assembly". council on foreign relations. retrieved 11 january 2015.

^ david gelles (21 september 2017). "it's the u.n.'s week, but executives make it a high-minded mingle". the new york times. retrieved 22 september 2017.


external links[edit]


united nations portal



wikimedia commons has media related to united nations general assembly.



wikisource has several original texts related to:
united nations general assembly
united nations general assembly
webcast archive for the un general assembly
subsection of the overall un webcast site
verbatim record of the 1st session of the un general assembly, jan. 1946
un democracy: hyper linked transcripts of the united nations general assembly and the security council
un general assembly – documentation research guide
council on foreign relations: the role of the un general assembly
authority control 
bibsys: 90289183
bne: xx104766
bnf: cb118776683 (data)
gnd: 2005003-3
isni: 0000 0001 2171 4246
lccn: n79007295
nkc: kn20010710266
nla: 35561878
selibr: 232389
snac: w6ck29w7
sudoc: 026550059
viaf: 141511717
 worldcat identities (via viaf): 141511717

vteunited nations general assembly sessionssessions
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
emergency special sessions
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

vtepresidents of the united nations general assembly1940s
spaak (  bel)
aranha (  bra)
arce (  arg)
evatt (  aus)
rómulo (  phi)
1950s
entezam (  iri)
nervo (  mex)
pearson (  can)
pandit (  ind)
van kleffens (  ned)
maza (  chi)
ortega (  chi)
prince wan waithayakon (  tha)
munro (  nzl)
malik (  lib)
belaúnde (  per)
1960s
boland (  irl)
slim (  tun)
khan (  pak)
rodriguez (  ven)
quaison-sackey (  gha)
fanfani (  ita)
pazhwak (  afg)
mănescu (  rom)
catalán (  gua)
brooks (  lbr)
1970s
hambro (  nor)
malik (  ina)
trepczyński (  pol)
benites (  ecu)
bouteflika (  alg)
thorn (  lux)
amerasinghe (  sri)
mojsov (  yug)
liévano (  col)
salim (  tan)
1980s
von wechmar (  brd)
kittani (  irq)
hollai (  hun)
illueca (  pan)
lusaka (  zam)
piniés (  esp)
choudhury (  ban)
florin (  ddr)
caputo (  arg)
garba (  ngr)
1990s
de marco (  mlt)
shihabi (  ksa)
ganev (  bul)
insanally (  guy)
essy (  civ)
freitas (  por)
ismail (  mas)
udovenko (  ukr)
opertti (  uru)
gurirab (  nam)
2000s
holkeri (  fin)
han (  kor)
kavan (  cze)
hunte (  lca)
ping (  gab)
eliasson (  swe)
al-khalifa (  bah)
kerim (  mkd)
d'escoto (  nic)
treki (  lib)
2010s
deiss (  sui)
nasser (  qat)
jeremić (  srb)
ashe (  ant)
kutesa (  uga)
lykketoft (  den)
thomson (  fij)
lajčák (  svk)
espinosa (  ecu)

vte united nations
antónio guterres, secretary-general
amina j. mohammed, deputy secretary-general
maría fernanda espinosa, general assembly president
united nations systemunited nations charter
preamble
principal organs
secretariat
secretary-general
deputy secretary-general
under-secretary-general
general assembly
president
international court of justice
security council
members
economic and social council
statute
trusteeship council
secretariat officesand departments
headquarters
envoy on youth
spokesperson for the secretary-general
geneva
palace of nations
nairobi
vienna
economic and social affairs
political affairs
public information
dag hammarskjöld library
safety and security
palestinian rights
peacekeeping operations
internal oversight
legal affairs
developing countries
sport for development and peace
disarmament affairs
outer space affairs
partnerships
coordination of humanitarian affairs
un organizations by location
united nations office for developing countries
sexual violence in conflict
programmes andspecialized agencies
culture of peace
fao
icao
ifad
ilo
imo
itc
ipcc
iaea
minurso
unido
itu
unaids
scsl
unctad
uncitral
uncdf
undg
undp
undpi
undpko
peacekeeping
unep
ozonaction
unep/grid-arendal
unep-wcmc
unesco
unfip
unfpa
un-habitat
ohchr
unhcr
unhrc
unicef
unicri
unidir
unitar
un-oceans
unodc
unops
unosat
unrisd
unrwa
unssc
unu
unu-op
unu-cris
unv
un women
unwto
upu
wfp
who
wipo
wmo
members and observers
full members
founding members
unsc permanent members
observers
european union
history
league of nations
four policemen
declaration by united nations
peacekeeping missions
history
timeline
enlargement
resolutions
security council vetoes
general assembly
66th
67th
security council
cyprus
iran
iraq
israel
lebanon
nagorno-karabakh
north korea
palestine
syria
western sahara
elections
secretary-general (2016)
international court of justice 2011
general assembly president (2016)
security council (2016)
related
bretton woods system
comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty
criticism
delivering as one
flag
honour flag
four nations initiative
genocide convention
un global compact
international covenant on civil and political rights
international criminal court
international decade for a culture of peace and non-violence for the children of the world
international years
interpreters
un laissez-passer
military staff committee
official languages
organisation for the prohibition of chemical weapons
peacekeeping
ralph bunche park
united nations postal administration
standard minimum rules for the administration of juvenile justice
standard minimum rules for the treatment of prisoners (the mandela rules)
treaty series
un day
universal declaration of human rights
millennium declaration
summit
development goals
security council veto power
un reform
security council reform
un art collection
un federal credit union
un memorial cemetery korea
vienna declaration and programme of action
world federation of united nations associations
other
outline
un television film series (1964–1966)
in popular culture

vtepermanent representatives to the united nationsafrica
liberia
morocco
tanzania
americas
barbados
canada
chile
colombia
guyana
honduras
panama
united states
asia
afghanistan
bangladesh
china
india
indonesia
iran
iraq
israel
pakistan
philippines
sri lanka
syria
europe
belgium
belarus
croatia
finland
france
germany
italy
lithuania
luxembourg
russia
sweden
united kingdom
ukraine
oceania
australia
new zealand
permanent observers
holy see
palestine
sovereign military order of malta
related articles
current permanent representatives
un members
general assembly
security council president




 
						retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=united_nations_general_assembly&oldid=883801538"					
categories: united nations general assemblyunited nations organsorganizations established in 19451945 establishments in new york (state)hidden categories: webarchive template wayback linksarticles with french-language external linksuse british english oxford spelling from october 2018use dmy dates from october 2018articles containing french-language textarticles needing additional references from january 2017all articles needing additional referencesall articles with unsourced statementsarticles with unsourced statements from october 2010commons category link from wikidatawikipedia articles with bibsys identifierswikipedia articles with bne identifierswikipedia articles with bnf identifierswikipedia articles with gnd identifierswikipedia articles with isni identifierswikipedia articles with lccn identifierswikipedia articles with nkc identifierswikipedia articles with nla identifierswikipedia articles with selibr identifierswikipedia articles with snac-id identifierswikipedia articles with sudoc identifierswikipedia articles with viaf identifierswikipedia articles with worldcat-viaf identifiers 



navigation menu


personal tools

not logged intalkcontributionscreate accountlog in 



namespaces

articletalk 




variants







views

readeditview history 



more





search



 







navigation


main pagecontentsfeatured contentcurrent eventsrandom articledonate to wikipediawikipedia store 



interaction


helpabout wikipediacommunity portalrecent changescontact page 



tools


what links hererelated changesupload filespecial pagespermanent linkpage informationwikidata itemcite this page 



print/export


create a bookdownload as pdfprintable version 



in other projects


wikimedia commons 



languages


alemannischالعربيةarpetanasturianuazərbaycancaবাংলাbân-lâm-gúбашҡортсабеларускаябеларуская (тарашкевіца)‎българскиbosanskicatalàčeštinadanskdeutscheestiελληνικάespañolesperantoeuskaraفارسیføroysktfrançaisgalego한국어հայերենहिन्दीhrvatskibahasa indonesiaíslenskaitalianoעבריתbasa jawaქართულიқазақшаkiswahililatinalatviešulietuviųmagyarमैथिलीмакедонскиമലയാളംमराठीმარგალურიمصرىbahasa melayuмонголမြန်မာဘာသာnederlandsनेपाली日本語norsknorsk nynorskoʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаپنجابیpolskiportuguêsromânăрусскийscotssimple englishslovenčinaslovenščinasoomaaligaکوردیсрпски / srpskisrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиbasa sundasuomisvenskaதமிழ்татарча/tatarçaไทยтоҷикӣtürkçeукраїнськаاردوtiếng việtwalon文言吴语粵語中文 
edit links 





 this page was last edited on 17 february 2019, at 18:44 (utc).
text is available under the creative commons attribution-sharealike license;
additional terms may apply.  by using this site, you agree to the terms of use and privacy policy. wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the wikimedia foundation, inc., a non-profit organization.


privacy policy
about wikipedia
disclaimers
contact wikipedia
developers
cookie statement
mobile view



 

 



(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgpageparsereport":{"limitreport":{"cputime":"1.252","walltime":"1.744","ppvisitednodes":{"value":9796,"limit":1000000},"ppgeneratednodes":{"value":0,"limit":1500000},"postexpandincludesize":{"value":259281,"limit":2097152},"templateargumentsize":{"value":7741,"limit":2097152},"expansiondepth":{"value":16,"limit":40},"expensivefunctioncount":{"value":17,"limit":500},"unstrip-depth":{"value":1,"limit":20},"unstrip-size":{"value":96518,"limit":5000000},"entityaccesscount":{"value":1,"limit":400},"timingprofile":["100.00% 1368.394      1 -total"," 27.80%  380.427      5 template:navbox"," 26.21%  358.637      1 template:presidents_of_the_un_general_assembly"," 24.75%  338.665     75 template:flagdeco"," 20.87%  285.560      1 template:reflist"," 14.11%  193.124     27 template:cite_web"," 12.32%  168.586      1 template:lang-fr"," 11.58%  158.453      1 template:infobox_united_nations"," 11.38%  155.785      1 template:infobox_organization","  9.86%  134.863      1 template:infobox"]},"scribunto":{"limitreport-timeusage":{"value":"0.517","limit":"10.000"},"limitreport-memusage":{"value":19831336,"limit":52428800}},"cachereport":{"origin":"mw1275","timestamp":"20190218235827","ttl":86400,"transientcontent":true}}});mw.config.set({"wgbackendresponsetime":130,"wghostname":"mw1274"});});


