



chiang kai-shek - wikipedia
document.documentelement.classname = document.documentelement.classname.replace( /(^|\s)client-nojs(\s|$)/, "$1client-js$2" );
(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgcanonicalnamespace":"","wgcanonicalspecialpagename":false,"wgnamespacenumber":0,"wgpagename":"chiang_kai-shek","wgtitle":"chiang kai-shek","wgcurrevisionid":883917348,"wgrevisionid":883917348,"wgarticleid":6859,"wgisarticle":true,"wgisredirect":false,"wgaction":"view","wgusername":null,"wgusergroups":["*"],"wgcategories":["pages using citations with accessdate and no url","articles with chinese-language external links","cs1: long volume value","cs1 maint: uses authors parameter","cs1 maint: archived copy as title","articles containing chinese-language text","articles with haudio microformats","articles containing traditional chinese-language text","all articles with minor pov problems","articles with minor pov problems from july 2018","wikipedia articles needing factual verification from march 2018","all articles with unsourced statements","articles with unsourced statements from february 2019","wikipedia articles needing clarification from august 2018","articles with unsourced statements from may 2010","articles with unsourced statements from february 2011","articles with unsourced statements from april 2009","wikipedia articles with style issues from november 2013","all articles with style issues","articles with unsourced statements from october 2011","articles needing additional references from october 2018","all articles needing additional references","wikipedia articles with bne identifiers","wikipedia articles with bnf identifiers","wikipedia articles with gnd identifiers","wikipedia articles with isni identifiers","wikipedia articles with lccn identifiers","wikipedia articles with nara identifiers","wikipedia articles with ndl identifiers","wikipedia articles with nkc identifiers","wikipedia articles with nla identifiers","wikipedia articles with selibr identifiers","wikipedia articles with snac-id identifiers","wikipedia articles with sudoc identifiers","wikipedia articles with viaf identifiers","wikipedia articles with worldcat-viaf identifiers","1887 births","1975 deaths","20th-century chinese heads of government","20th-century chinese military personnel","baoding military academy cadets","chiang kai-shek","deified chinese people","chinese anti-communists","chinese nationalists","chinese methodists","chinese military personnel of world war ii","chinese nationalist heads of state","chinese revolutionaries","converts to christianity","foreign recipients of the legion of merit","formerly missing people","generalissimos","honorary knights grand cross of the order of the bath","japanese military personnel","knights of the order of the rajamitrabhorn","kuomintang politicians in taiwan","marshals of china","missing person cases in china","kidnapped chinese people","genocide perpetrators","people of the chinese civil war","people of the northern expedition","people of the xinhai revolution","people of the central plains war","politicians from ningbo","premiers of the republic of china","presidents of the republic of china on taiwan","recipients of the order of the sacred tripod","recipients of the order of the white lion","republic of china politicians from zhejiang","taiwanese people from zhejiang","tongmenghui members","world war ii political leaders","fascist rulers"],"wgbreakframes":false,"wgpagecontentlanguage":"en","wgpagecontentmodel":"wikitext","wgseparatortransformtable":["",""],"wgdigittransformtable":["",""],"wgdefaultdateformat":"dmy","wgmonthnames":["","january","february","march","april","may","june","july","august","september","october","november","december"],"wgmonthnamesshort":["","jan","feb","mar","apr","may","jun","jul","aug","sep","oct","nov","dec"],"wgrelevantpagename":"chiang_kai-shek","wgrelevantarticleid":6859,"wgrequestid":"xguywapaad4aahemuawaaadt","wgcspnonce":false,"wgisprobablyeditable":true,"wgrelevantpageisprobablyeditable":true,"wgrestrictionedit":[],"wgrestrictionmove":[],"wgflaggedrevsparams":{"tags":{}},"wgstablerevisionid":null,"wgcategorytreepagecategoryoptions":"{\"mode\":0,\"hideprefix\":20,\"showcount\":true,\"namespaces\":false}","wgwikieditorenabledmodules":[],"wgbetafeaturesfeatures":[],"wgmediavieweronclick":true,"wgmediaviewerenabledbydefault":true,"wgpopupsshouldsendmoduletouser":true,"wgpopupsconflictswithnavpopupgadget":false,"wgvisualeditor":{"pagelanguagecode":"en","pagelanguagedir":"ltr","pagevariantfallbacks":"en","usepageimages":true,"usepagedescriptions":true},"wgmfispagecontentmodeleditable":true,"wgmfenablefontchanger":true,"wgmfdisplaywikibasedescriptions":{"search":true,"nearby":true,"watchlist":true,"tagline":false},"wgrelatedarticles":null,"wgrelatedarticlesusecirrussearch":true,"wgrelatedarticlesonlyusecirrussearch":false,"wgwmeschemaeditattemptstepoversample":false,"wgpoweredbyhhvm":true,"wgulscurrentautonym":"english","wgnoticeproject":"wikipedia","wgcentralnoticecookiestodelete":[],"wgcentralnoticecategoriesusinglegacy":["fundraising","fundraising"],"wgwikibaseitemid":"q16574","wgscorenotelanguages":{"arabic":"العربية","catalan":"català","deutsch":"deutsch","english":"english","espanol":"español","italiano":"italiano","nederlands":"nederlands","norsk":"norsk","portugues":"português","suomi":"suomi","svenska":"svenska","vlaams":"west-vlams"},"wgscoredefaultnotelanguage":"nederlands","wgcentralauthmobiledomain":false,"wgcodemirrorenabled":true,"wgvisualeditortoolbarscrolloffset":0,"wgvisualeditorunsupportededitparams":["undo","undoafter","veswitched"],"wgeditsubmitbuttonlabelpublish":true,"oreswikiid":"enwiki","oresbaseurl":"http://ores.discovery.wmnet:8081/","oresapiversion":3});mw.loader.state({"ext.gadget.charinsert-styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site.styles":"ready","site.styles":"ready","noscript":"ready","user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site":"ready","user":"ready","user.options":"ready","user.tokens":"loading","ext.cite.styles":"ready","mediawiki.page.gallery.styles":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.shared":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.commonprint":"ready","mediawiki.toc.styles":"ready","wikibase.client.init":"ready","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.noscript":"ready","ext.uls.interlanguage":"ready","ext.wikimediabadges":"ready","ext.3d.styles":"ready","mediawiki.skinning.interface":"ready","skins.vector.styles":"ready"});mw.loader.implement("user.tokens@0tffind",function($,jquery,require,module){/*@nomin*/mw.user.tokens.set({"edittoken":"+\\","patroltoken":"+\\","watchtoken":"+\\","csrftoken":"+\\"});
});rlpagemodules=["ext.cite.ux-enhancements","site","mediawiki.page.startup","mediawiki.page.ready","mediawiki.toc","mediawiki.searchsuggest","ext.gadget.teahouse","ext.gadget.referencetooltips","ext.gadget.watchlist-notice","ext.gadget.drn-wizard","ext.gadget.charinsert","ext.gadget.reftoolbar","ext.gadget.extra-toolbar-buttons","ext.gadget.switcher","ext.centralauth.centralautologin","mmv.head","mmv.bootstrap.autostart","ext.popups","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.init","ext.visualeditor.targetloader","ext.eventlogging","ext.wikimediaevents","ext.navigationtiming","ext.uls.eventlogger","ext.uls.init","ext.uls.compactlinks","ext.uls.interface","ext.quicksurveys.init","ext.centralnotice.geoip","ext.centralnotice.startup","skins.vector.js"];mw.loader.load(rlpagemodules);});























 





chiang kai-shek 
from wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 jump to navigation
jump to search
this is a chinese name; the family name is chiang.
@media all and (max-width:720px){.mw-parser-output .mobile-float-reset{float:none!important;width:100%!important}}.mw-parser-output .stack-container{box-sizing:border-box}.mw-parser-output .stack-clear-left{float:left;clear:left}.mw-parser-output .stack-clear-right{float:right;clear:right}.mw-parser-output .stack-left{float:left}.mw-parser-output .stack-right{float:right}.mw-parser-output .stack-object{margin:1px;overflow:hidden}
generalissimochiang kai-shekgcb gcyc ร.ม.ภ gcs cclh lom dsm .mw-parser-output .nobold{font-weight:normal}蔣中正蔣介石1940 photo of chiang kai-shek in full military uniform. (colourized in 1946)chairman of the national government of chinain officeaugust 1, 1943 – may 20, 1948acting until october 10, 1943premiersoong tse-venvice chairmansun fopreceded bylin sensucceeded byhimself (as president of the republic of china)in officeoctober 10, 1928 – december 15, 1931premiertan yankaisoong tse-venpreceded bytan yankaisucceeded bylin senchairman of the military affairs commissionin officedecember 15, 1931 – may 31, 1946preceded byposition establishedsucceeded byposition abolishedpresident of the republic of chinain officemarch 1, 1950 – april 5, 1975premieryen hsi-shanchen chengyu hung-chunchen chengyen chia-kanchiang ching-kuovice presidentli zongrenchen chengyen chia-kanpreceded byli zongren (acting)succeeded byyen chia-kanin officemay 20, 1948 – january 21, 1949premierchang chunwong wen-haosun fovice presidentli zongrenpreceded byhimself (as chairman of the nationalist government)succeeded byli zongren (acting)premier of the republic of chinain officemarch 1, 1947 – april 18, 1947preceded bysoong tse-vensucceeded bychang chunin officenovember 20, 1939 – may 31, 1945presidentlin senpreceded byhsiang-hsi kungsucceeded bysoong tse-venin officedecember 9, 1935 – january 1, 1938presidentlin senpreceded bywang jingweisucceeded byhsiang-hsi kungin officedecember 4, 1930 – december 15, 1931preceded bysoong tse-vensucceeded bychen mingshuchairman of the kuomintangin officemay 12, 1936 – april 1, 1938preceded byhu hanminsucceeded byhimself as director-general of the kuomintangin officejuly 6, 1926 – march 11, 1927preceded byzhang renjiesucceeded bywoo tsin-hang and li yuyingdirector-general of the kuomintangin officeapril 1, 1938 – april 5, 1975deputywang jingweichen chengpreceded byhimself as chairman of the kuomintangsucceeded bychiang ching-kuo (as chairman of the kuomintang)
personal detailsborn(1887-10-31)october 31, 1887fenghua, zhejiang, qing dynasty, chinadiedapril 5, 1975(1975-04-05) (aged 87)taipei, taiwanresting placecihu mausoleum, taoyuan, taiwannationalityrepublic of chinapolitical partykuomintangspouse(s)mao fumeiyao yechengchen jierusoong mei-lingchildrenchiang ching-kuochiang wei-kuo (adopted)alma materbaoding military academy, imperial japanese army academy preparatory schoolawardsorder of national glory, order of blue sky and white sun, 1st class order of the sacred tripod, legion of meritsignaturemilitary servicenickname(s)"generalissimo" or "red general"[1]allegiancekuomintangbranch/servicerepublic of china armyyears of service1911–1975rankgeneral special class (特級上將)battles/warsxinhai revolution, northern expedition, sino-tibetan war, kumul rebellion, soviet invasion of xinjiang, chinese civil war, second sino-japanese war, kuomintang islamic insurgency in china (1950–1958)
chiang kai-shek"chiang kai-shek" in traditional (top) and simplified (bottom) chinese characterstraditional chinese蔣介石simplified chinese蒋介石transcriptionsstandard mandarinhanyu pinyinjiǎng jièshígwoyeu romatzyhjeang jiehshyrwade–gileschiang3 chieh4-shih2ipa[tɕjàŋ tɕjê.ʂɻ̩̌] (listen)wushanghaineseromanizationtɕiã˧˥ ka˧˥ zàʔ˨˧yue: cantoneseyale romanizationjeung2 gaai3-sek6ipa[tsœ̌ːŋ kāːi.sɛ̀ːk̚]jyutpingzoeng2 gaai3-sek6southern minhokkien pojchiúⁿ kài-se̍kregister nametraditional chinese蔣周泰simplified chinese蒋周泰transcriptionsstandard mandarinhanyu pinyinjiǎng zhōutàigwoyeu romatzyhjeang joutayipa[tɕjàŋ ʈʂóu.tʰâi]wushanghaineseromanizationtɕiã˧˥ tsɤ˥˨ tʰa˧˥yue: cantonesejyutpingzoeng2 zau1-taai3southern minhokkien pojchiúⁿ chiu-thàimilk nametraditional chinese蔣瑞元simplified chinese蒋瑞元transcriptionsstandard mandarinhanyu pinyinjiǎng ruìyuángwoyeu romatzyhjeang ruey'yuanipa[tɕjàŋ ɻwêi.ɥɛ̌n]wushanghaineseromanizationtɕiã˧˥ zø˩˧ɲyø˩˧yue: cantonesejyutpingzoeng2 seoi6-jyun4southern minhokkien pojchiúⁿ sūi-gôanschool nametraditional chinese蔣志清simplified chinese蒋志清transcriptionsstandard mandarinhanyu pinyinjiǎng zhìqīnggwoyeu romatzyhjeang jyhchingipa[tɕjàŋ ʈʂɻ̩̂.tɕʰíŋ]wushanghaineseromanizationtɕiã˧˥ tsɨ˧˥ tɕʰiɲ˥˨yue: cantonesejyutpingzoeng2 zi3-cing1southern minhokkien pojchiúⁿ chì-chhengadopted nametraditional chinese蔣中正simplified chinese蒋中正transcriptionsstandard mandarinhanyu pinyinjiǎng zhōngzhènggwoyeu romatzyhjeang jongjenqwade–gileschiang chung-chengipa[tɕjàŋ ʈʂʊ́ŋ.ʈʂə̂ŋ]wushanghaineseromanizationtɕiã˧˥ tsoŋ˥˨ tsəɲ˧˥yue: cantoneseyale romanizationjeung2 jung1-jeng3jyutpingzoeng2 zung1-zing3southern minhokkien pojchiúⁿ tiong-chèng


chiang kai-shek (/ˈtʃæŋ kaɪˈʃɛk, dʒiˈɑːŋ/;[2] 31 october 1887 – 5 april 1975), also known as   generalissimo chiang  or chiang chungcheng and romanized as chiang chieh-shih or  jiang jieshi, was a politician and military leader who served as the leader of the republic of china between 1928 and 1975, first in mainland china until 1949 and then in taiwan until his death. he was recognized by much of the world as the head of the legitimate government of china until 1971, during which the united nations passed resolution 2758.
chiang was an influential member of the kuomintang (kmt), the chinese nationalist party, as well as a close ally of sun yat-sen. chiang became the commandant of the kuomintang's whampoa military academy and took sun's place as leader of the kmt following the canton coup in early 1926. having neutralized the party's left wing, chiang then led sun's long-postponed northern expedition, conquering or reaching accommodations with china's many warlords.[3]
from 1928 to 1948, chiang served as the generalissimo of the national government of the republic of china (roc). chiang was a nationalist, promoting traditional chinese culture in the new life movement. unable to maintain sun's good relations with the chinese communist party (ccp), chiang tried to purge them in the 1927 shanghai massacre and repressed uprisings at kwangtung ("canton" region) and elsewhere.
at the onset of the second sino-japanese war, which later became the chinese theater of world war ii, marshal zhang xueliang kidnapped chiang and obliged him to establish a second united front with the ccp. after the defeat of the japanese, the american-sponsored marshall mission, an attempt to negotiate a coalition government, failed in 1946. the chinese civil war resumed, with the ccp led by mao zedong defeating the kmt and declaring the people's republic of china in 1949. chiang's government and army retreated to taiwan, where chiang imposed martial law and persecuted critics in a period known as the "white terror". after evacuating to taiwan, chiang's government continued to declare its intention to retake mainland china. chiang ruled taiwan securely as president of the republic of china and general of the kuomintang until his death in 1975, just one year before mao's death.[4]
like mao, chiang is regarded as a controversial figure. supporters credit him with playing a major part in the allied victory of world war ii and unifying the nation and a national figure of the chinese resistance against japan as well as his staunch anti-soviet and anti-communist stance. detractors and critics denounce him as a dictator at the front of an authoritarian autocracy who suppressed and purged opponents and critics and arbitrarily incarcerated those he deemed as opposing to the kuomintang among others.

contents

1 names
2 early life
3 education in japan
4 return to china
5 establishment of the kuomintang
6 competition with wang jingwei
7 rising power
8 rule

8.1 mass deaths under nationalist rule
8.2 first phase of the chinese civil war
8.3 second sino-japanese war
8.4 french indochina
8.5 ryukyus
8.6 second phase of the chinese civil war

8.6.1 treatment and use of japanese soldiers
8.6.2 conditions during the chinese civil war
8.6.3 competition with li zongren
8.6.4 final communist advance


8.7 on taiwan

8.7.1 preparations to retake the mainland
8.7.2 regime
8.7.3 relationship with japan
8.7.4 relationship with the united states


8.8 death


9 cult of personality
10 philosophy
11 contemporary public perception
12 family

12.1 wives
12.2 family tree


13 religion and relationships with religious communities

13.1 religious views
13.2 relationship with muslims
13.3 relationship with buddhists and christians


14 honours
15 see also
16 references
17 further reading
18 external links


names[edit]
like many other chinese historical figures, chiang used several names throughout his life. that inscribed in the genealogical records of his family is jiang zhoutai (chinese: 蔣周泰; wade–giles: chiang chou-t‘ai). this so-called "register name" (譜名) is the one under which his extended relatives knew him, and the one he used in formal occasions, such as when he got married. in deference to tradition, family members did not use the register name in conversation with people outside of the family. the concept of a "real" or original name is not as clear-cut in china as it is in the western world.
in honor of tradition, chinese families waited a number of years before officially naming their children. in the meantime, they used a "milk name" (乳名), given to the infant shortly after his birth and known only to the close family, thus the actual name that chiang received at birth was jiang ruiyuan (chinese: 蔣瑞元; wade–giles: chiang jui-yuan).
in 1903, the 16-year-old chiang went to ningbo to be a student, and he chose a "school name" (學名). this was actually the formal name of a person, used by older people to address him, and the one he would use the most in the first decades of his life (as the person grew older, younger generations would have to use one of the courtesy names instead). colloquially, the school name is called "big name" (chinese: 大名), whereas the "milk name" is known as the "small name" (chinese: 小名). the school name that chiang chose for himself was zhiqing (chinese: 志清; wade–giles: chi-ch‘ing, which means "purity of aspirations"). for the next fifteen years or so, chiang was known as jiang zhiqing (wade-giles: chiang chi-ch‘ing). this is the name under which sun yat-sen knew him when chiang joined the republicans in kwangtung in the 1910s.
in 1912, when jiang zhiqing was in japan, he started to use the name chiang kai-shek (chinese: 蔣介石; pinyin: jiang jieshi (help·info); wade-giles: chiang chieh-shih) as a pen name for the articles that he published in a chinese magazine he founded: voice of the army (chinese: 軍聲). jieshi is the pinyin romanization of this name, based on mandarin, but the most recognized romanized rendering is kai-shek which is in cantonese romanization. as the republicans were based in canton (a cantonese speaking area, now commonly known as guangdong province), chiang became known by westerners under the cantonese romanization of his courtesy name, while the family name as known in english seems to be the mandarin pronunciation of his chinese family name, transliterated in wade-giles.
"kai-shek"/"jieshi" soon became chiang's courtesy name (字). some think the name was chosen from the classic chinese book the i ching; "介于石", "[he who is] firm as a rock", is the beginning of line 2 of hexagram 16, "豫". others note that the first character of his courtesy name is also the first character of the courtesy name of his brother and other male relatives on the same generation line, while the second character of his courtesy name shi (石—meaning "stone") suggests the second character of his "register name" tai (泰—the famous mount tai of china). courtesy names in china often bore a connection with the personal name of the person. as the courtesy name is the name used by people of the same generation to address the person, chiang soon became known under this new name.
sometime in 1917 or 1918, as chiang became close to sun yat-sen, he changed his name from jiang zhiqing to jiang zhongzheng (chinese: 蔣中正; wade–giles: chiang chung-cheng). by adopting the name chung-cheng ("central uprightness"), he was choosing a name very similar to the name of sun yat-sen, who was (and still is) known among chinese as zhongshan (中山—meaning "central mountain"), thus establishing a link between the two. the meaning of uprightness, rectitude, or orthodoxy, implied by his name, also positioned him as the legitimate heir of sun yat-sen and his ideas. not surprisingly, the chinese communists always rejected the use of this name and it is not well known in mainland china. however, it was readily accepted by members of the chinese nationalist party and is the name under which chiang kai-shek is still commonly known in taiwan. often the name is shortened to "chung-cheng" only ("zhongzheng" in pinyin). many public places in taiwan are named chungcheng after chiang. for many years passengers arriving at the chiang kai-shek international airport were greeted by signs in chinese welcoming them to the "chung cheng international airport". similarly, the monument erected to chiang's memory in taipei, known in english as chiang kai-shek memorial hall, was literally named "chung cheng memorial hall" in chinese. in singapore, chung cheng high school was named after him.
his name is also written in taiwan as "the late president lord chiang" (先總統　蔣公), where the one-character-wide space known as nuo tai shows respect, but this practice has lost some popularity. however, he is still known as lord chiang (蔣公) (without the title or space), along with the name chiang chung-cheng, in taiwan.


early life[edit]
chiang was born in xikou, a town in fenghua, zhejiang, about 30 kilometers (19 mi) west of central ningbo. his family's ancestral home—a concept important in chinese society—was heqiao (和橋鎮), a town in yixing, jiangsu, about 38 km (24 mi) southwest of central wuxi and 10 km (6.2 mi) from the shores of lake tai. his father jiang zhaocong (蔣肇聰) and mother wang caiyu (王采玉) were members of a prosperous family of salt merchants. chiang lost his father when he was eight, and he wrote of his mother as the "embodiment of confucian virtues". the young chiang was inspired throughout his youth by the realisation that the reputation of an honored family rested upon his shoulders. he was a mischievous child, at only three years old he thrust a pair of chopsticks down his throat to see how far they would reach. they became stuck and were removed with great difficulty. even at a young age he was interested in war, and directed mimic campaigns with a wooden sword and spear. as he grew older, chiang became more aware of the issues that surrounded him and in his speech to the kuomintang in 1945 said:

.mw-parser-output .templatequote{overflow:hidden;margin:1em 0;padding:0 40px}.mw-parser-output .templatequote .templatequotecite{line-height:1.5em;text-align:left;padding-left:1.6em;margin-top:0}as you all know i was an orphan boy in a poor family. deprived of any protection after the death of her husband, my mother was exposed to the most ruthless exploitation by neighbouring ruffians and the local gentry. the efforts she made in fighting against the intrigues of these family intruders certainly endowed her child, brought up in such environment, with an indomitable spirit to fight for justice. i felt throughout my childhood that mother and i were fighting a helpless lone war. we were alone in a desert, no available or possible assistance could we look forward to. but our determination was never shaken, nor hope abandoned.[5]

education in japan[edit]
chiang grew up at a time in which military defeats, natural disasters, revolts, and the machinations[neutrality is disputed] of the empress dowager cixi had left the manchu-dominated qing empire destabilized and in debt. successive demands of the western powers and japan since the opium war had left china owing millions of taels of silver. during his first visits to japan to pursue a military career in 1906, he describes having strong nationalistic feelings with a desire among other things to, "expel the manchu qing and to restore china".[6] he decided to pursue a military career. he began his military training at the baoding military academy in 1906, the same year japan left its bimetallic currency standard, devaluing its yen. he left for tokyo shinbu gakko, a preparatory school for the imperial japanese army academy intended for chinese students, in 1907. there, he came under the influence of compatriots to support the revolutionary movement to overthrow the qing and to set up a han-dominated chinese republic. he befriended fellow zhejiangese chen qimei, and in 1908 chen brought chiang into the tongmenghui, an important revolutionary brotherhood of the era. finishing his schooling, chiang served in the imperial japanese army from 1909 to 1911.

return to china[edit]
after learning of the outbreak (october 1911) of the wuchang uprising, chiang returned to china in 1911, intending to fight as an artillery officer. he served in the revolutionary forces, leading a regiment in shanghai under his friend and mentor chen qimei, as one of chen's chief lieutenants. in early 1912 a dispute arose between chen and tao chen-chang, an influential member of the revolutionary alliance who opposed both sun yat-sen and chen. tao sought to avoid escalating the quarrel by hiding in a hospital but chiang discovered him there. chen dispatched assassins. chiang may not have taken part in the act, but would later assume responsibility to help chen avoid trouble. chen valued chiang despite chiang's already legendary temper, regarding such bellicosity as useful in a military leader.[7] alternatively, professor pichon loh reports that chiang may have killed tao in the hospital with a pistol.[8][need quotation to verify]
chiang's friendship with chen qimei signaled an association with shanghai's criminal syndicate (the green gang headed by du yuesheng and huang jinrong). during chiang's time in shanghai, the british-administered shanghai international settlement police watched him and charged him with various felonies. these charges never resulted in a trial, and chiang was never jailed.[9]
chiang became a founding member of the kmt after the success (february 1912) of the 1911 revolution. after the takeover of the republican government by yuan shikai and the failed second revolution in 1913, chiang, like his kmt comrades, divided his time between exile in japan and the havens of the shanghai international settlement. in shanghai, chiang cultivated ties with the city's underworld gangs, which were dominated by the notorious green gang and its leader du yuesheng. on 18 may 1916, agents of yuan shikai assassinated chen qimei. chiang then succeeded chen as leader of the chinese revolutionary party in shanghai. sun yat-sen's political career reached its lowest point during this time when most of his old revolutionary alliance comrades refused to join him in the exiled chinese revolutionary party.[10]

establishment of the kuomintang[edit]
in 1917, sun yat-sen moved his base of operations to canton (now known as guangzhou), and chiang joined him in 1918. at this time sun remained largely sidelined; and, without arms or money, was soon expelled from kwangtung and exiled again to shanghai. he was restored to kwangtung with mercenary help in 1920. after returning to kwangtung, a rift developed between sun, who sought to militarily unify china under the kmt, and guangdong governor chen jiongming, who wanted to implement a federalist system with guangdong as a model province. on 16 june 1922, ye ju, a general of chen's whom sun had attempted to exile, led an assault of kwangtung's presidential palace.[11] sun had already fled to the naval yard[12] and boarded the ss haiqi,[13] but his wife narrowly evaded shelling and rifle fire as she fled.[14] they met on the ss yongfeng, where they were joined—as swiftly as he could return from shanghai, where he was ritually mourning his mother's death—by chiang.[15] for about 50 days,[16] chiang stayed with sun, protecting and caring for him and earning his lasting trust. they abandoned their attacks on chen on august 9, taking a british ship to hong kong[15] and traveling to shanghai by steamer.[16]

 sun yat-sen and chiang at the 1924 opening ceremonies for the soviet-funded whampoa military academy
 chiang, early 1920s
sun regained control of kwangtung in early 1923, again with the help of mercenaries from yunnan and from the comintern. undertaking a reform of the kmt, he established a revolutionary government aimed at unifying china under the kmt. that same year, sun sent chiang to spend three months in moscow studying the soviet political and military system. during his trip in russia, chiang met leon trotsky and other soviet leaders, but quickly came to the conclusion that the russian model of government was not suitable for china. chiang later sent his eldest son, ching-kuo, to study in russia. after his father's split from the first united front in 1927, ching-kuo was forced to stay there, as a hostage, until 1937. chiang wrote in his diary, "it is not worth it to sacrifice the interest of the country for the sake of my son."[17][18] chiang even refused to negotiate a prisoner swap for his son in exchange for the chinese communist party leader.[19] his attitude remained consistent, and he continued to maintain, by 1937, that "i would rather have no offspring than sacrifice our nation's interests." chiang had absolutely no intention of ceasing the war against the communists.[20]
chiang kai-shek returned to kwangtung and in 1924 was appointed commandant of the whampoa military academy by sun. chiang resigned from the office for one month in disagreement with sun's extremely close cooperation with the comintern, but returned at sun's demand. the early years at whampoa allowed chiang to cultivate a cadre of young officers loyal to both the kmt and himself.
throughout his rise to power, chiang also benefited from membership within the nationalist tiandihui fraternity, to which sun yat-sen also belonged, and which remained a source of support during his leadership of the kuomintang.

competition with wang jingwei[edit]
 chiang (right) together with wang jingwei (left), 1926
sun yat-sen died on 12 march 1925,[21] creating a power vacuum in the kuomintang. a contest ensued among wang jingwei, liao zhongkai, and hu hanmin. in august, liao was assassinated and hu arrested for his connections to the murderers. wang jingwei, who had succeeded sun as chairman of the kwangtung regime, seemed ascendant but was forced into exile by chiang following the canton coup. the ss yongfeng, renamed the zhongshan in sun's honor, had appeared off changzhou[22]—the location of the whampoa academy—on apparently falsified orders[23] and amid a series of unusual phone calls trying to ascertain chiang's location.[24] he initially considered fleeing kwangtung and even booked passage on a japanese steamer, but then decided to use his military connections to declare martial law on 20 march 1926, and crack down on communist and soviet influence over the nra, the military academy, and the party.[23] the right wing of the party supported him and stalin—anxious to maintain soviet influence in the area—had his lieutenants agree to chiang's demands[25] regarding a reduced communist presence in the kmt leadership in exchange for certain other concessions.[23] the rapid replacement of leadership enabled chiang to effectively end civilian oversight of the military after may 15, though his authority was somewhat limited[25] by the army's own regional composition and divided loyalties. on 5 june 1926, he was named commander-in-chief of the national revolutionary army[26] and, on july 27, he finally launched sun's long-delayed northern expedition, aimed at conquering the northern warlords and bringing china together under the kmt.
the nra branched into three divisions: to the west was the returned wang jingwei, who led a column to take wuhan; bai chongxi's column went east to take shanghai; chiang himself led in the middle route, planning to take nanjing before pressing ahead to capture beijing. however, in january 1927, wang jingwei and his kmt leftist allies took the city of wuhan amid much popular mobilization and fanfare. allied with a number of chinese communists and advised by soviet agent mikhail borodin, wang declared the national government as having moved to wuhan. having taken nanjing in march (and briefly visited shanghai, now under the control of his close ally bai chongxi), chiang halted his campaign and prepared a violent break with wang's leftist elements, which he believed threatened his control of the kmt.[citation needed]
now with an established national government in nanjing, and supported by conservative allies including hu hanmin, chiang's expulsion of the communists and their soviet advisers led to the beginning of the chinese civil war. wang jingwei's national government was weak militarily, and was soon ended by chiang with the support of a local warlord (li zongren of guangxi). eventually, wang and his leftist party surrendered to chiang and joined him in nanjing. in the central plains war, beijing was taken on june, 1928, from an alliance of the warlords feng yuxiang and yan xishan. in december, the manchurian warlord zhang xueliang pledged allegiance to chiang's government, completing chiang's nominal unification of china and ending the warlord era.[citation needed]
in 1927, when he was setting up the nationalist government in nanjing, he was preoccupied with "the elevation of our leader dr. sun yat-sen to the rank of 'father of our chinese republic'. dr. sun worked for 40 years to lead our people in the nationalist cause, and we cannot allow any other personality to usurp this honored position". he asked chen guofu to purchase a photograph that had been taken in japan around 1895 or 1898. it showed members of the revive china society with yeung kui-wan (楊衢雲 or 杨衢云, pinyin yáng qúyún) as president, in the place of honor, and sun, as secretary, on the back row, along with members of the japanese chapter of the revive china society. when told that it was not for sale, chiang offered a million dollars to recover the photo and its negative. "the party must have this picture and the negative at any price. they must be destroyed as soon as possible. it would be embarrassing to have our father of the chinese republic shown in a subordinate position".[27] chiang never obtained either the photo or its negative.[citation needed]
chiang made great efforts to gain recognition as the official successor of sun yat-sen. in a pairing of great political significance, chiang was sun's brother-in-law: he had married soong mei-ling, the younger sister of soong ching-ling, sun's widow, on 1 december 1927. originally rebuffed in the early 1920s, chiang managed to ingratiate himself to some degree with soong mei-ling's mother by first divorcing his wife and concubines and promising to sincerely study the precepts of christianity. he read the copy of the bible that may-ling had given him twice before making up his mind to become a christian, and three years after his marriage he was baptized in the soong's methodist church. although some observers felt that he adopted christianity as a political move, studies of his recently opened diaries suggest that his faith was strong and sincere and that he felt that christianity reinforced confucian moral teachings.[28]
upon reaching beijing, chiang paid homage to sun yat-sen and had his body moved to the new capital of nanjing to be enshrined in a grand mausoleum.

rising power[edit]
 chiang and feng yuxiang in 1928
in the west and in the soviet union, chiang kai-shek was known as the "red general".[1] movie theaters in the soviet union showed newsreels and clips of chiang. at moscow, sun yat-sen university portraits of chiang were hung on the walls; and, in the soviet may day parades that year, chiang's portrait was to be carried along with the portraits of karl marx, vladimir lenin, joseph stalin, and other communist leaders.[29] the united states consulate and other westerners in shanghai were concerned about the approach of "red general" chiang as his army was seizing control of large areas of the country in the northern expedition.[30][31]
on april 12, 1927, chiang carried out a purge of thousands of suspected communists and dissidents in shanghai, and began large-scale massacres across the country collectively known as the "white terror". during april, more than 12,000 people were killed in shanghai. the killings drove most communists from urban cities and into the rural countryside, where the kmt was less powerful.[32] in the year after april 1927, over 300,000 people died across china in anti-communist suppression campaigns, executed by the kmt. one of the most famous quotes from chiang (during that time) was that he would rather mistakenly kill 1,000 innocent people rather than allow one communist to escape.[33] some estimates claim the white terror in china took millions of lives, most of them in the rural areas.  no concrete number can be verified.[34]  chiang allowed soviet agent and advisor mikhail borodin and soviet general vasily blücher (galens) "escape"  to safety after the purge.[35]

rule[edit]
main articles: northern expedition and nationalist government (china)
see also: whampoa military academy and nanjing decade
 a 1945 photo of chiang kai-shek during a visit to an air force base
having gained control of china, chiang's party remained surrounded by "surrendered" warlords who remained relatively autonomous within their own regions. on 10 october 1928, chiang was named director of the state council, the equivalent to president of the country, in addition to his other titles.[36] as with his predecessor sun yat-sen, the western media dubbed him "generalissimo".[26]
according to sun yat-sen's plans, the kuomintang (kmt) was to rebuild china in three steps: military rule, political tutelage, and constitutional rule. the ultimate goal of the kmt revolution was democracy, which was not considered to be feasible in china's fragmented state. since the kmt had completed the first step of revolution through seizure of power in 1928, chiang's rule thus began a period of what his party considered to be "political tutelage" in sun yat-sen's name. during this so-called republican era, many features of a modern, functional chinese state emerged and developed.
from 1928 to 1937, a time period known as known as the nanjing decade, some aspects of foreign imperialism, concessions and privileges[clarification needed] in china were moderated through diplomacy. the government acted to modernize the legal and penal systems, attempted to stabilize prices, amortize debts, reform the banking and currency systems, build railroads and highways, improve public health facilities, legislate against traffic in narcotics, and augment industrial and agricultural production. not all of these projects were successfully completed. efforts were made towards improving education standards, and in an effort to unify chinese society, the new life movement was launched to encourage confucian moral values and personal discipline. guoyu ("national language") was promoted as a standard tongue, and the establishment of communications facilities (including radio) were used to encourage a sense of chinese nationalism in a way that was not possible when the nation lacked an effective central government.
any successes that the nationalists did make, however, were met with constant political and military upheavals. while much of the urban areas were now under the control of the kmt, much of the countryside remained under the influence of weakened yet undefeated warlords and communists. chiang often resolved issues of warlord obstinacy through military action, but such action was costly in terms of men and material. the 1930 central plains war alone nearly bankrupted the nationalist government and caused almost 250,000 casualties on both sides. in 1931, hu hanmin, chiang's old supporter, publicly voiced a popular concern that chiang's position as both premier and president flew in the face of the democratic ideals of the nationalist government. chiang had hu put under house arrest, but he was released after national condemnation, after which he left nanjing and supported a rival government in canton. the split resulted in a military conflict between hu's kwangtung government and chiang's nationalist government. chiang only won the campaign against hu after a shift in allegiance by zhang xueliang, who had previously supported hu hanmin.

 chiang and soong on the cover of time magazine, oct 26, 1931
throughout his rule, complete eradication of the communists remained chiang's dream. after assembling his forces in kiangsi, chiang led his armies against the newly established chinese soviet republic. with help from foreign military advisers, chiang's fifth campaign finally surrounded the chinese red army in 1934. the communists, tipped off that a nationalist offensive was imminent, retreated in the long march, during which mao zedong rose from a mere military official to the most influential leader of the communist party of china.
chiang, as a nationalist and a confucianist, was against the iconoclasm of the may fourth movement. motivated by his sense of nationalism, he viewed some western ideas as foreign, and he believed that the great introduction of western ideas and literature that the may fourth movement promoted was not beneficial to china. he and dr. sun criticized the may fourth intellectuals as corrupting the morals of china's youth.[37]
contrary to communist propaganda that he was pro-capitalism, chiang antagonized the capitalists of shanghai, often attacking them and confiscating their capital and assets for the use of the government. chiang confiscated the wealth of capitalists even while he denounced and fought against communists.[38] chiang crushed pro-communist worker and peasant organizations and rich shanghai capitalists at the same time. chiang continued the anti-capitalist ideology of sun yat-sen, directing kuomintang media to openly attack capitalists and capitalism, while demanding government controlled industry instead.[39]
chiang has often been interpreted as being pro-capitalist, but this conclusion may be problematic. shanghai capitalists did briefly support him out of fear of communism in 1927, but this support eroded in 1928 when chiang turned his tactics of intimidation on them. the relationship between chiang kai-shek and chinese capitalists remained poor throughout the period of his administration.[40] chiang blocked chinese capitalists from gaining any political power or voice within his regime. once chiang kai-shek was done with his white terror on pro-communist laborers, he proceeded to turn on the capitalists. gangster connections allowed chiang to attack them in the international settlement, successfully forcing capitalists to back him up with their assets for his military expeditions.[40]
chiang viewed japan, america, the soviet union, france and britain as all being imperialists with nobody else's interests in mind but their own, seeing them as hypocritical to condemn each other for imperialism which they all practiced.[41][42] he manipulated america, nazi germany, and the soviet union to regain lost territories for china as he viewed all the powers as imperialists trying to curtail and suppress china's power and national resurrection.[43]

mass deaths under nationalist rule[edit]
some sources attribute chiang kai-shek with responsibility for millions of deaths[44][45] in scattered mass death events caused by the nationalist government of china. he is certainly partially responsible for the 1938 yellow river flood, which killed hundreds of thousands of chinese civilians in order to fend off a japanese advance.[46] this accusation is usually sourced from rudolph rummel who was referring to the nationalist regime as whole rather than chiang kai-shek in particular. regardless the nationalist government of china has been accused of mass killings by rummel, estimating the nationalist government of china is responsible for between 6 and 18.5 million deaths.
he attributes this death toll to a few major causes, for example:[47]

1.3 million chinese civilians starved or killed in order to fend off communist advance
hundreds of thousands (300,000[48]) of peasants and communist killed in political repression.
1.75 to 2.5 million chinese starving to death due to grain being confiscated and sold to other peasants for the profit of nationalist government officials.
4,212,000 chinese perishing at the start of both the civil war and the second sino-japanese war due to starving to death or dying from disease during horrific conscription campaigns.
440,000 to 893,000 chinese civilians perishing in a man made flood by the nationalists to stop a japanese advance.
first phase of the chinese civil war[edit]
 nationalist government of nanking - nominally ruling over entire china in 1930s
in nanjing, on april 1931, chiang kai-shek attended a national leadership conference with zhang xueliang and general ma fuxiang, in which chiang and zhang dauntlessly upheld that manchuria was part of china in the face of the japanese invasion.[49] after the japanese invasion of manchuria in 1931, chiang resigned as chairman of the national government. he returned shortly afterwards, adopting the slogan "first internal pacification, then external resistance". however, this policy of avoiding a frontal war against the japanese was widely unpopular. in 1932, while chiang was seeking first to defeat the communists, japan launched an advance on shanghai and bombarded nanjing. this disrupted chiang's offensives against the communists for a time, although it was the northern factions of hu hanmin's kwangtung government (notably the 19th route army) that primarily led the offensive against the japanese during this skirmish. brought into the nationalist army immediately after the battle, the 19th route army's career under chiang would be cut short after it was disbanded for demonstrating socialist tendencies.
in december 1936, chiang flew to xi'an to coordinate a major assault on the red army and the communist republic that had retreated into yan'an. however, chiang's allied commander zhang xueliang, whose forces were used in his attack and whose homeland of manchuria had been recently invaded by the japanese, did not support the attack on the communists. on december 12, zhang and several other nationalist generals headed by yang hucheng of shaanxi kidnapped chiang for two weeks in what is known as the xi'an incident. they forced chiang into making a "second united front" with the communists against japan. after releasing chiang and returning to nanjing with him, zhang was placed under house arrest and the generals who had assisted him were executed. chiang's commitment to the second united front was nominal at best, and it was all but broken up in 1941.


second sino-japanese war[edit]
 after the breakout of the second sino-japanese war, the young companion featured chiang on its cover.
the second sino-japanese war broke out in july 1937, and in august of that year chiang sent 600,000 of his best-trained and equipped soldiers to defend shanghai. with over 200,000 chinese casualties, chiang lost the political cream of his whampoa-trained officers. although chiang lost militarily, the battle dispelled japanese claims that it could conquer china in three months and demonstrated to the western powers that the chinese would continue the fight. by december, the capital city of nanjing had fallen to the japanese resulting in the nanking massacre. chiang moved the government inland, first to wuhan and later to chongqing.
having lost most of china's economic and industrial centers, chiang withdrew into the hinterlands, stretching the japanese supply lines and bogging down japanese soldiers in the vast chinese interior. as part of a policy of protracted resistance, chiang authorized the use of scorched earth tactics, resulting in many civilian deaths. during the nationalists' retreat from zhengzhou, the dams around the city were deliberately destroyed by the nationalist army in order to delay the japanese advance, killing 500,000 people in the subsequent 1938 yellow river flood.
after heavy fighting, the japanese occupied wuhan in the fall of 1938 and the nationalists retreated farther inland, to chongqing. while en route to chongqing, the nationalist army intentionally started the "fire of changsha", as a part of the scorched earth policy. the fire destroyed much of the city, killed twenty thousand civilians, and left hundreds of thousands of people homeless. due to an organizational error (it was claimed), the fire was begun without any warning to the residents of the city. the nationalists eventually blamed three local commanders for the fire and executed them. newspapers across china blamed the fire on (non-kmt) arsonists, but the blaze contributed to a nationwide loss of support for the kmt.[50]
in 1939 muslim leaders isa yusuf alptekin and ma fuliang were sent by chiang to several middle eastern countries, including egypt, turkey, and syria, to gain support for the chinese war against japan, and to express his support for muslims.[51]
the japanese, controlling the puppet-state of manchukuo and much of china's eastern seaboard, appointed wang jingwei as a quisling-ruler of the occupied chinese territories around nanjing. wang named himself president of the executive yuan and chairman of the national government (not the same 'national government' as chiang's), and led a surprisingly large[quantify] minority of anti-chiang/anti-communist chinese against his old comrades. he died in 1944, within a year of the end of world war ii.
the hui muslim xidaotang sect pledged allegiance to the kuomintang after their rise to power and hui muslim general bai chongxi acquainted chiang kaishek with the xidaotang jiaozhu ma mingren in 1941 in chongqing.[52]
in 1942 generalissimo chiang kai-shek went on tour in northwestern china in xinjiang, gansu, ningxia, shaanxi, and qinghai, where he met both muslim generals ma buqing and ma bufang.[53] he also met the muslim generals ma hongbin and ma hongkui separately.

 chiang with franklin d. roosevelt and winston churchill in cairo, egypt, november 1943
a border crisis erupted with tibet in 1942. under orders from chiang kai-shek, ma bufang repaired yushu airport to prevent tibetan separatists from seeking independence.[54] chiang also ordered ma bufang to put his muslim soldiers on alert for an invasion of tibet in 1942.[55] ma bufang complied and moved several thousand troops to the border with tibet.[56] chiang also threatened the tibetans with aerial bombardment if they worked with the japanese. ma bufang attacked the tibetan buddhist tsang monastery in 1941.[57] he also constantly attacked the labrang monastery.[58]
with the attack on pearl harbor and the opening of the pacific war, china became one of the allied powers. during and after world war ii, chiang and his american-educated wife soong mei-ling, known in the united states as "madame chiang", held the support of the china lobby in the united states, which saw in them the hope of a christian and democratic china. chiang was even named the supreme commander of allied forces in the china war zone. he was appointed knight grand cross of the order of the bath in 1942.[59]
general joseph stilwell, an american military adviser to chiang during world war ii, strongly criticized chiang and his generals for what he saw as their incompetence and corruption.[60] in 1944, the united states army air corps commenced operation matterhorn in order to bomb japan's steel industry from bases to be constructed in mainland china. this was meant to fulfill president roosevelt's promise to chiang kai-shek to begin bombing operations against japan by november 1944. however, chiang kai-shek's subordinates refused to take airbase construction seriously until enough capital had been delivered to permit embezzlement on a massive scale. stilwell estimated that at least half of the $100 million spent on construction of airbases was embezzled by nationalist party officials.[61]
chiang played the soviets and americans against each other during the war. he first told the americans that they would be welcome in talks between the soviet union and china, then secretly told the soviets that the americans were unimportant and that their opinions would not be considered. chiang also used american support and military power in china against the ambitions of the soviet union to dominate the talks, stopping the soviets from taking full advantage of the situation in china with the threat of american military action against the soviets.[62]

french indochina[edit]
u.s. president franklin d. roosevelt, through general stilwell, privately made it clear that they preferred that the french not reacquire french indochina (modern day vietnam, cambodia and laos) after the war was over. roosevelt offered chiang control of all of indochina. it was said that chiang replied: "under no circumstances!"[63]
after the war, 200,000 chinese troops under general lu han were sent by chiang kai-shek to northern indochina (north of the 16th parallel) to accept the surrender of japanese occupying forces there, and remained in indochina until 1946, when the french returned.[64][65] the chinese used the vnqdd, the vietnamese branch of the chinese kuomintang, to increase their influence in indochina and to put pressure on their opponents.[66] chiang kai-shek threatened the french with war in response to maneuvering by the french and ho chi minh's forces against each other, forcing them to come to a peace agreement. in february 1946 he also forced the french to surrender all of their concessions in china and to renounce their extraterritorial privileges in exchange for the chinese withdrawing from northern indochina and allowing french troops to reoccupy the region. following france's agreement to these demands, the withdrawal of chinese troops began in march 1946.[67][68][69][70]

ryukyus[edit]
during the cairo conference in 1943, chiang said that roosevelt asked him whether china would like to claim the ryukyu islands from japan in addition to retaking taiwan, the pescadores, and manchuria. chiang claims that he said he was in favor of an international presence on the islands.[71] however, the u.s. became the sole protector of the ryukyus in 1945, and reverted it to the japanese in 1972 while securing us military presence there.

second phase of the chinese civil war[edit]
main articles: chinese civil war and chinese communist revolution
see also: constitution of the republic of china and republic of china presidential election, 1948
treatment and use of japanese soldiers[edit]
 chiang and his wife soong mei-ling sharing a laugh with u.s. lieutenant general joseph w. stilwell, burma, april 1942
in 1945, when japan surrendered, chiang's chongqing government was ill-equipped and ill-prepared to reassert its authority in formerly japanese-occupied china, and it asked the japanese to postpone their surrender until kuomintang (kmt) authority could arrive to take over. american troops and weapons soon bolstered kmt forces, allowing them to reclaim cities. the countryside, however, remained largely under communist control.
for over a year after the japanese surrender, rumors circulated throughout china that the japanese had entered into a secret agreement with chiang, in which the japanese would assist the nationalists in fighting the communists in exchange for the protection of japanese persons and property there. many top nationalist generals, including chiang, had studied and trained in japan before the nationalists had returned to the mainland in the 1920s, and maintained close personal friendships with top japanese officers. the japanese general in charge of all forces in china, general yasuji okamura, had personally trained officers who later became generals in chiang's staff. reportedly, general okamura, before surrendering command of all japanese military forces in nanjing, offered chiang control of all 1.5 million japanese military and civilian support staff then present in china. reportedly, chiang seriously considered accepting this offer, but declined only in the knowledge that the united states would certainly be outraged by the gesture. even so, armed japanese troops remained in china well into 1947, with some noncommissioned officers finding their way into the nationalist officer corps.[72]  that the japanese in china came to regard chiang as a magnanimous figure to whom many japanese owed their lives and livelihoods was a fact attested by both nationalist and communist sources.[73]

conditions during the chinese civil war[edit]
 chiang kai-shek and mao zedong in 1945
westad says the communists won the civil war because they made fewer military mistakes than chiang kai-shek, and because in his search for a powerful centralized government, chiang antagonized too many interest groups in china. furthermore, his party was weakened in the war against japan. meanwhile, the communists told different groups, such as peasants, exactly what they wanted to hear, and cloaked themselves in the cover of chinese nationalism.[74]
following the war, the united states encouraged peace talks between chiang and communist leader mao zedong in chongqing. due to concerns about widespread and well-documented corruption in chiang's government throughout his rule, the u.s. government limited aid to chiang for much of the period of 1946 to 1948, in the midst of fighting against the people's liberation army led by mao zedong. alleged infiltration of the u.s. government by chinese communist agents may have also played a role in the suspension of american aid.[75]
chiang's right-hand man, the secret police chief dai li, was both anti-american and anti-communist.[76] dai ordered kuomintang agents to spy on american officers.[77] earlier, dai had been involved with the blue shirts society, a fascist-inspired paramilitary group within the kuomintang, which wanted to expel western and japanese imperialists, crush the communists, and eliminate feudalism.[78] dai li died in a plane crash, which was suspected to be an assassination orchestrated by chiang.[79]
although chiang had achieved status abroad as a world leader, his government deteriorated as the result of corruption and inflation. in his diary on june 1948, chiang wrote that the kmt had failed, not because of external enemies but because of rot from within.[80] the war had severely weakened the nationalists, while the communists were strengthened by their popular land-reform policies,[81] and by a rural population that supported and trusted them. the nationalists initially had superiority in arms and men, but their lack of popularity, infiltration by communist agents, low morale, and disorganization soon allowed the communists to gain the upper hand in the civil war.

competition with li zongren[edit]
a new constitution was promulgated in 1947, and chiang was elected by the national assembly as the first term president of the republic of china on 20 may 1948. this marked the beginning of what was termed the "democratic constitutional government" period by the kmt political orthodoxy, but the communists refused to recognize the new constitution, and its government, as legitimate. chiang resigned as president on 21 january 1949, as kmt forces suffered terrible losses and defections to the communists. after chiang's resignation the vice-president of the roc, li zongren, became china's acting president.
shortly after chiang's resignation the communists halted their advances and attempted to negotiate the virtual surrender of the roc. li attempted to negotiate milder terms that would have ended the civil war, but without success. when it became clear that li was unlikely to accept mao's terms, the communists issued an ultimatum in april 1949, warning that they would resume their attacks if li did not agree within five days. li refused.[82]
li's attempts to carry out his policies faced varying degrees of opposition from chiang's supporters, and were generally unsuccessful. chiang especially antagonized li by taking possession of (and moving to taiwan) us$200 million of gold and us dollars belonging to the central government that li desperately needed to cover the government's soaring expenses. when the communists captured the nationalist capital of nanjing in april 1949, li refused to accompany the central government as it fled to guangdong, instead expressing his dissatisfaction with chiang by retiring to guangxi.[83]

 chiang with south korean president syngman rhee in 1949
the former warlord yan xishan, who had fled to nanjing only one month before, quickly insinuated himself within the li-chiang rivalry, attempting to have li and chiang reconcile their differences in the effort to resist the communists. at chiang's request yan visited li in order to convince li not to withdraw from public life. yan broke down in tears while talking of the loss of his home province of shanxi to the communists, and warned li that the nationalist cause was doomed unless li went to guangdong. li agreed to return under the condition that chiang surrender most of the gold and us dollars in his possession that belonged to the central government, and that chiang stop overriding li's authority. after yan communicated these demands and chiang agreed to comply with them, li departed for guangdong.[83]
in guangdong, li attempted to create a new government composed of both chiang supporters and those opposed to chiang. li's first choice of premier was chu cheng, a veteran member of the kuomintang who had been virtually driven into exile due to his strong opposition to chiang. after the legislative yuan rejected chu, li was obliged to choose yan xishan instead. by this time yan was well known for his adaptability and chiang welcomed his appointment.[83]
conflict between chiang and li persisted. although he had agreed to do so as a prerequisite of li's return, chiang refused to surrender more than a fraction of the wealth that he had sent to taiwan. without being backed by gold or foreign currency, the money issued by li and yan quickly declined in value until it became virtually worthless.[84]
although he did not hold a formal executive position in the government, chiang continued to issue orders to the army, and many officers continued to obey chiang rather than li. the inability of li to coordinate kmt military forces led him to put into effect a plan of defense that he had contemplated in 1948. instead of attempting to defend all of southern china, li ordered what remained of the nationalist armies to withdraw to guangxi and guangdong, hoping that he could concentrate all available defenses on this smaller, and more easily defensible, area. the object of li's strategy was to maintain a foothold on the chinese mainland in the hope that the united states would eventually be compelled to enter the war in china on the nationalist side.[84]

final communist advance[edit]
 map of the chinese civil war (1946-1950)
chiang opposed li's plan of defense because it would have placed most of the troops still loyal to chiang under the control of li and chiang's other opponents in the central government. to overcome chiang's intransigence li began ousting chiang's supporters within the central government. yan xishan continued in his attempts to work with both sides, creating the impression among li's supporters that he was a "stooge" of chiang, while those who supported chiang began to bitterly resent yan for his willingness to work with li. because of the rivalry between chiang and li, chiang refused to allow nationalist troops loyal to him to aid in the defense of kwangsi and canton, with the result that communist forces occupied canton in october 1949.[85]
after canton fell to the communists, chiang relocated the government to chungking, while li effectively surrendered his powers and flew to new york for treatment of his chronic duodenum illness at the hospital of columbia university. li visited the president of the united states, harry s. truman, and denounced chiang as a dictator and an usurper. li vowed that he would "return to crush" chiang once he returned to china. li remained in exile, and did not return to taiwan.[86]
in the early morning of 10 december 1949, communist troops laid siege to chengtu, the last kmt-controlled city in mainland china, where chiang kai-shek and his son chiang ching-kuo directed the defense at the chengtu central military academy. chiang kai-shek, father and son, sang the republic of china's national anthem while leaving the academy all the way to the airfield.[citation needed] the aircraft may-ling evacuated them to taiwan on the same day. chiang kai-shek would never return to the mainland.
chiang did not re-assume the presidency until 1 march 1950. on january 1952, chiang commanded the control yuan, now in taiwan, to impeach li in the "case of li zongren's failure to carry out duties due to illegal conduct" (李宗仁違法失職案). chiang relieved li of the position as vice-president in the national assembly on march 1954.

on taiwan[edit]
main articles: taiwan after world war ii and project national glory
see also: republic of china armed forces and white terror (taiwan)
preparations to retake the mainland[edit]
chiang moved the government to taipei, taiwan, where he resumed his duties as president of the republic of china on 1 march 1950.[87] chiang was reelected by the national assembly to be the president of the republic of china (roc) on 20 may 1954, and again in 1960, 1966, and 1972. he continued to claim sovereignty over all of china, including the territories held by his government and the people's republic, as well as territory the latter ceded to foreign governments, such as tuva and outer mongolia. in the context of the cold war, most of the western world recognized this position and the roc represented china in the united nations and other international organizations until the 1970s.

 chiang with japanese politician nobusuke kishi, circa 1950
during his presidency on taiwan, chiang continued making preparations in order to take back mainland china. he developed the roc army in order to prepare for an invasion of the mainland, and to defend taiwan in case of an attack by the communist forces. he also financed armed groups in mainland china, such as muslim soldiers of the roc army left in yunnan under li mi, who continued to fight. it was not until the 1980s that these troops were finally airlifted to taiwan.[88] he promoted the uyghur yulbars khan to governor during the islamic insurgency on the mainland for resisting the communists, even though the government had already evacuated to taiwan.[89] he planned an invasion of the mainland in 1962.[90] in the 1950s chiang's airplanes dropped supplies to kuomintang muslim insurgents in amdo.[91]

regime[edit]
despite the democratic constitution, the government under chiang was a one-party state, consisting almost completely of mainlanders; the "temporary provisions effective during the period of communist rebellion" greatly enhanced executive powers, and the goal of retaking mainland china allowed the kmt to maintain a monopoly on power and the prohibition of opposition parties. the government's official line for these martial law provisions stemmed from the claim that emergency provisions were necessary, since the communists and kmt were still in a state of war. seeking to promote chinese nationalism, chiang's government actively ignored and suppressed local cultural expression, even forbidding the use of local languages in mass media broadcasts or during class sessions. as a result of taiwan's anti-government uprising in 1947, known as the february 28 incident, the kmt-led political repression resulted in the death or disappearance of over 30,000 taiwanese intellectuals, activists, and people suspected of opposition to the kmt.[92]
the first decades after the nationalists moved the seat of government to the province of taiwan are associated with the organized effort to resist communism known as the "white terror", during which about 140,000 taiwanese were imprisoned for their real or perceived opposition to the kuomintang.[93] most of those prosecuted were labeled by the kuomintang as "bandit spies" (匪諜), meaning spies for chinese communists, and punished as such.
under chiang, the government recognized limited civil and economic freedoms, property rights (personal[citation needed] and intellectual) and other liberties. despite these restrictions, free debate within the confines of the legislature was permitted. under the pretext that new elections could not be held in communist-occupied constituencies, the national assembly, legislative yuan, and control yuan members held their posts indefinitely. the temporary provisions also allowed chiang to remain as president beyond the two-term limit in the constitution. he was reelected by the national assembly as president four times—doing so in 1954, 1960, 1966, and 1972.

 chiang presiding over the 1966 double ten celebrations
believing that corruption and a lack of morals were key reasons that the kmt lost mainland china to the communists, chiang attempted to purge corruption by dismissing members of the kmt accused of graft. some major figures in the previous mainland chinese government, such as h. h. kung and t. v. soong, exiled themselves to the united states. although politically authoritarian and, to some extent, dominated by government-owned industries, chiang's new taiwanese state also encouraged economic development, especially in the export sector. a popular sweeping land reform act, as well as american foreign aid during the 1950s, laid the foundation for taiwan's economic success, becoming one of the four asian tigers.
after chiang's death, the next president, chiang's son, chiang ching-kuo, and chiang ching-kuo's successor, lee teng-hui a native taiwanese, would, in the 1980s and 1990s, increase native taiwanese representation in the government and loosen the many authoritarian controls of the early era of roc control in taiwan.

relationship with japan[edit]
in 1971, the australian opposition leader gough whitlam, who became prime minister in 1972 and swiftly relocated the australian mission from taipei to beijing, visited japan. after meeting with the japanese prime minister, eisaku sato, whitlam observed that the reason japan at that time was hesitant to withdraw recognition from the nationalist government was "the presence of a treaty between the japanese government and that of chiang kai-shek". sato explained that the continued recognition of japan towards the nationalist government was due largely to the personal relationship that various members of the japanese government felt towards chiang. this relationship was rooted largely in the generous and lenient treatment of japanese prisoners-of-war by the nationalist government in the years immediately following the japanese surrender in 1945, and was felt especially strongly as a bond of personal obligation by the most senior members then in power.[94]
although japan recognized the people's republic in 1972, shortly after kakuei tanaka succeeded sato as prime minister of japan, the memory of this relationship was strong enough to be reported by the new york times (15 april 1978) as a significant factor inhibiting trade between japan and the mainland. there is speculation that a clash between communist forces and a japanese warship in 1978 was caused by chinese anger after prime minister takeo fukuda attended chiang's funeral. historically, japanese attempts to normalize their relationship with the people's republic were met with accusations of ingratitude in taiwan.[94]

relationship with the united states[edit]
 chiang with u.s. president dwight d. eisenhower in june 1960.
chiang was suspicious that covert operatives of the united states plotted a coup against him. in 1950, chiang ching-kuo became director of the secret police (bureau of investigation and statistics), which he remained until 1965. chiang was also suspicious of politicians who were overly friendly to the united states, and considered them his enemies. in 1953, seven days after surviving an assassination attempt, wu kuo-chen lost his position as governor of taiwan province to chiang ching-kuo. after fleeing to united states the same year, he became a vocal critic of chiang's family and government.[95]
chiang ching-kuo, educated in the soviet union, initiated soviet-style military organization in the republic of china military. he reorganized and sovietized the political officer corps, and propagated kuomintang ideology throughout the military. sun li-jen, who was educated at the american virginia military institute, was opposed to this.[96]
chiang ching-kuo orchestrated the controversial court-martial and arrest of general sun li-jen in august 1955, for plotting a coup d'état with the american central intelligence agency (cia) against his father chiang kai-shek and the kuomintang. the cia allegedly wanted to help sun take control of taiwan and declare its independence.[95][97]

death[edit]
see also: cihu mausoleum
 the national chiang kai-shek memorial hall is a famous monument, landmark, and tourist attraction in taipei, taiwan.
in 1975, 26 years after chiang came to taiwan, he died in taipei at the age of 87. he had suffered a heart attack and pneumonia in the foregoing months and died from renal failure aggravated with advanced cardiac malfunction on april 5.
a month of mourning was declared. chinese music composer hwang yau-tai wrote the chiang kai-shek memorial song. in mainland china, however, chiang's death was met with little apparent mourning and communist state-run newspapers gave the brief headline "chiang kai-shek has died." chiang's body was put in a copper coffin and temporarily interred at his favorite residence in cihu, daxi, taoyuan. when his son chiang ching-kuo died in 1988, he was entombed in a separate mausoleum in nearby touliao (頭寮). the hope was to have both buried at their birthplace in fenghua if and when it was possible. in 2004, chiang fang-liang, the widow of chiang ching-kuo, asked that both father and son be buried at wuzhi mountain military cemetery in xizhi, taipei county (now new taipei city). chiang's ultimate funeral ceremony became a political battle between the wishes of the state and the wishes of his family.
chiang was succeeded as president by vice president yen chia-kan and as kuomintang party ruler by his son chiang ching-kuo, who retired chiang kai-shek's title of director-general and instead assumed the position of chairman. yen's presidency was interim; chiang ching-kuo, who was the premier, became president after yen's term ended three years later.

cult of personality[edit]
this section's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on wikipedia. see wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions. (november 2013) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
 chiang's portrait in tiananmen rostrum
chiang's portrait hung over tiananmen square before mao's portrait was set up in its place.[98] people also put portraits of chiang in their homes and in public on the streets.[99][100][101]
chiang was popular among many people and dressed in plain, simple clothes, unlike contemporary chinese warlords who dressed extravagantly.[102]
quotes from the quran and hadith were used by muslims in the kuomintang-controlled muslim publication, the yuehua, to justify chiang kai-shek's rule over china.[103]
when the muslim general and warlord ma lin was interviewed, ma lin was described as having "high admiration for and unwavering loyalty to chiang kai-shek".[104]
in the philippines, a school was named in his honor in 1939. today, chiang kai shek college is the largest educational institution for the chinoy community in the country.

philosophy[edit]
this section's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on wikipedia. see wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions. (november 2013) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
 chiang-kai-shek and winston churchill heads, with nationalist china flag and union jack
the kuomintang used traditional chinese religious ceremonies, and promoted martyrdom in chinese culture. kuomintang ideology promoted the view that the souls of party martyrs who died fighting for the kuomintang, the revolution, and the party founder dr. sun yat-sen were sent to heaven. chiang kai-shek believed that these martyrs witnessed events on earth from heaven.[105][106][107][108]
when the northern expedition was complete, kuomintang generals led by chiang kai-shek paid tribute to dr. sun's soul in heaven with a sacrificial ceremony at the xiangshan temple in beijing in july 1928. among the kuomintang generals present were the muslim generals bai chongxi and ma fuxiang.[109]
chiang kai-shek considered both the han chinese and all the minority peoples of china, the five races under one union, as descendants of yellow emperor, the yellow emperor and semi mythical founder of the chinese nation, and belonging to the chinese nation zhonghua minzu and he introduced this into kuomintang ideology, which was propagated into the educational system of the republic of china.[110][111][112]

contemporary public perception[edit]
 statue of chiang kai-shek in yangmingshan national park, taiwan
chiang's legacy has been the target of heated debates because of the different views held about him. for some, chiang was a national hero who led the victorious northern expedition against the beiyang warlords in 1927, achieving chinese unification, and who subsequently led china to ultimate victory against japan in 1945. some blamed him for not doing enough against the japanese forces in the lead-up to, and during, the second sino-japanese war, preferring to withhold his armies for the fight against the communists, or merely waiting and hoping that the united states would get involved. some also see him as a champion of anti-communism, being a key figure during the formative years of the world anti-communist league. during the cold war, he was also seen as the leader who led free china and the bulwark against a possible communist invasion. however, chiang presided over purges, political authoritarianism, and graft during his tenure in mainland china, and ruled throughout a period of imposed martial law. his governments were accused of being corrupt even before he even took power in 1928. he also allied with known criminals like du yuesheng for political and financial gains. some opponents charge that chiang's efforts in developing taiwan were mostly to make the island a strong base from which to one day return to mainland china, and that chiang had little regard for the long-term prosperity and well-being of the taiwanese people.
today, chiang's popularity in taiwan is divided along political lines, enjoying greater support among kuomintang (kmt) supporters. he is generally unpopular among democratic progressive party (dpp) voters and supporters who blame him for the thousands killed during the february 28 incident and criticise his subsequent dictatorial rule.[113] in sharp contrast to his son, chiang ching-kuo, and to sun yat-sen, his memory is rarely invoked by current political parties, including the kuomintang.  in contrast, his image has been rehabilitated in contemporary mainland china.  until recently portrayed as a villain who fought against the "liberation" of china by the communists, since the 2000s, he has been portrayed by the media in a neutral or slightly positive light as a chinese nationalist who tried to bring about national unification and resisted the japanese invasion during world war ii.  this shift is largely in response to current political landscape of taiwan, in relation to chiang's commitment to a unified china and his stance against taiwanese separatism during his rule of the island, along with the recent détente between the communist party of china (cpc) and chiang's kmt.[114] in contrast to efforts to remove his public monuments in taiwan, his ancestral home in fenghua, zhejiang on the mainland has become a commemorative museum and major tourist attraction.[115]
in the united states and europe, chiang was often perceived negatively as the one who lost china to the communists. his constant demands for western support and funding also earned him the nickname of "general cash-my-check". in the west he has been criticized for his poor military skills. he had a record of issuing unrealistic orders and persistently attempting to fight unwinnable battles, leading to the loss of his best troops.[116]
in recent years, there has been an attempt to find a more moderate interpretation of chiang. chiang is now increasingly perceived as a man simply overwhelmed by the events in china, having to fight simultaneously communists, japanese, and provincial warlords while having to reconstruct and unify the country. his sincere, albeit often unsuccessful attempts to build a more powerful nation have been noted by scholars such as jonathan fenby and rana mitter. mitter has observed that, ironically, today's china is closer to chiang's vision than to mao zedong's. he argues that the communists, since the 1980s, have essentially created the state envisioned by chiang in the 1930s. mitter concludes by writing that "one can imagine chiang kai-shek's ghost wandering round china today nodding in approval, while mao's ghost follows behind him, moaning at the destruction of his vision".[117] liang shuming opined that chiang kai-shek's "greatest contribution was to make the ccp successful. if he had been a bit more trustworthy, if his character was somewhat better, the ccp would have been unable to beat him".[118]
formosa betrayed, one of the few american movies concerning the process of democratization in taiwan, depicts chiang kai-shek as a brutal dictator, responsible for the execution of thousands of native taiwanese during the days following the february 28 incident.

family[edit]
wives[edit]




mao fumei (毛福梅, 1882–1939), who died in the second sino-japanese war during a bombardment, is the mother to his son and successor chiang ching-kuo






yao yecheng (姚冶誠, 1889–1972), who came to taiwan and died in taipei






chen jieru (陳潔如, "jennie", 1906–1971), who lived in shanghai, but moved to hong kong later and died there






soong mei-ling (宋美齡, 1898–2003), who moved to the united states after chiang kai-shek's death, is arguably his most famous wife even though they had no children together




in an arranged marriage, chiang was married to a fellow villager named mao fumei. while married to mao, chiang adopted two concubines (concubinage was still a common practice for well-to-do, non-christian males in china): he married yao yecheng (姚冶誠, 1889–1972) in 1912 and chen jieru (陳潔如, 1906–1971) in december 1921. while he was still living in shanghai, chiang and yao adopted a son, wei-kuo. chen adopted a daughter in 1924, named yaoguang (瑤光), who later adopted her mother's surname. chen's autobiography refuted the idea that she was a concubine.[119] chen claiming that, by the time she married chiang, he had already divorced yao, and that chen was therefore his wife. chiang and mao had a son, ching-kuo.
according to the memoirs of chen jieru, chiang's second wife, she contracted gonorrhea from chiang soon after their marriage. he told her that he acquired this disease after separating from his first wife and living with his concubine yao yecheng, as well as with many other women he consorted with. his doctor explained to her that chiang had sex with her before completing his treatment for the disease. as a result, both chiang and ch'en chieh-ju believed they had become sterile, which would explain why he had only one child, by his first wife; however, a purported miscarriage by soong mei-ling in august 1928 would, if it actually occurred, cast serious doubt on whether this was true.[30][120]

family tree[edit]
the xikou (chikow) chiangs were descended from chiang shih-chieh who during the 1600s (17th century) moved there from fenghua district, whose ancestors in turn came to southeastern china's zhejiang (chekiang) province after moving out of northern china in the 13th century ad. the 12th century bc duke of zhou's (duke of chou) third son was the ancestors of the chiangs.[121][122][123][124][125][126]
his great grandfather was chiang qi-zeng (jiang qizeng) 蒋祈增, his grandfather was chiang si-qian 蒋斯千, his uncle was chiang zhao-hai 蔣肇海, and his father was chiang zhao-cong (jiang zhaocong) 蔣肇聰.[127][128]



family of chiang kai-shek





soong may‑ling宋美齡mao fumei毛福梅chiang kai‑shek蔣介石yao yecheng姚冶誠(concubine)chen jieru陳潔如(concubine)



faina chiang fang‑liang蔣方良chiang ching‑kuo蔣經國chang ya‑juo章亞若(mistress)shih chin‑i石靜宜chiang wei‑kuo蔣緯國(adopted)chiu ju‑hsüeh丘如雪chen yao‑kuang陈瑶光(adopted)



alan chiang hsiao‑wen蔣孝文amy chiang hsiao‑chang蔣孝章alex chiang hsiao‑wu蔣孝武eddie chiang hsiao‑yung蔣孝勇winston chang hsiao‑tzu章孝慈john chiang hsiao‑yen蔣孝嚴chiang hsiao‑kang蔣孝剛




dashed lines represent marriages.
dotted lines represent adoptions and extra-marital relationships.
solid lines represent descendants.


religion and relationships with religious communities[edit]
chiang personally dealt extensively with religions and power figures in china during his regime.

religious views[edit]
chiang kai-shek was born and raised as a buddhist, but became a methodist upon his marriage to his fourth wife, soong mei-ling. it was previously believed that this was a political move,[129] but studies of his recently opened diaries suggest that his faith was sincere[28].

relationship with muslims[edit]
 chiang kai-shek with the muslim general ma fushou
chiang developed relationships with other generals. chiang became a sworn brother of the chinese muslim general ma fuxiang and appointed him to high ranking positions. chiang addressed ma fuxiang's son ma hongkui as shao yun shixiong[130] ma fuxiang attended national leadership conferences with chiang during battles against japan.[131] ma hongkui was eventually scapegoated for the failure of the ningxia campaign against the communists, so he moved to the us instead of remaining in taiwan with chiang.
when chiang became president of china after the northern expedition, he carved out ningxia and qinghai out of gansu province, and appointed muslim generals as military governors of all three provinces: ma hongkui, ma hongbin, and ma qi. the three muslim governors, known as xibei san ma (lit. "the three mas of the northwest"), controlled armies composed entirely of muslims. chiang called on the three and their subordinates to wage war against the soviet peoples, tibetans, communists, and the japanese. chiang continued to appoint muslims as governors of the three provinces, including ma lin and ma fushou. chiang's appointments, the first time that muslims had been appointed as governors of gansu, increased the prestige of muslim officials in northwestern china. the armies raised by this "ma clique", most notably their muslim cavalry, were incorporated into the kmt army. chiang appointed a muslim general, bai chongxi, as the minister of national defence of the republic of china, which controlled the roc military.
chiang also supported the muslim general ma zhongying, whom he had trained at whampoa military academy during the kumul rebellion, in a jihad against jin shuren, sheng shicai, and the soviet union during the soviet invasion of xinjiang. chiang designated ma's muslim army as the 36th division (national revolutionary army) and gave his troops kuomintang flags and uniforms. chiang then supported muslim general ma hushan against sheng shicai and the soviet union in the xinjiang war (1937). all muslim generals commissioned by chiang in the national revolutionary army swore allegiance to him. several, like ma shaowu and ma hushan were loyal to chiang and kuomintang hardliners.
the ili rebellion and pei-ta-shan incident plagued relations with the soviet union during chiang's rule and caused trouble with the uyghurs. during the ili rebellion and peitashan incident, chiang deployed hui troops against uyghur mobs in turfan, and against soviet russian and mongols at peitashan.
during chiang's rule, attacks on foreigners by kuomintang forces flared up in several incidents. one of these was the battle of kashgar (1934) where a muslim army loyal to the kuomintang massacred 4,500 uyghurs, and killed several british at the british consulate in kashgar. the british were unable to retaliate.
hu songshan, a muslim imam, backed chiang kai-shek's regime and gave prayers for his government. roc flags were saluted by muslims in ningxia during prayer along with exhortations to nationalism during chiang's rule. chiang sent muslim students abroad to study at places like al azhar and muslim schools throughout china taught loyalty to his regime.
the yuehua, a chinese muslim publication, quoted the quran and hadith to justify submitting to chiang kai-shek as the leader of china, and as justification for jihad in the war against japan.[132]
the yihewani (ikhwan al muslimun a.k.a. muslim brotherhood) was the predominant muslim sect backed by the chiang government during chiang's regime. other muslim sects, like the xidaotang and sufi brotherhoods like jahriyya and khuffiya were also supported by his regime. the chinese muslim association, a pro-kuomintang and anti-communist organization, was set up by muslims working in his regime. salafism attempted to gain a foothold in china during his regime, but the yihewani and hanafi sunni gedimu denounced the salafis as radicals, engaged in fights against them, and declared them heretics, forcing the salafis to form a separate sect.[133][134][135][136] ma ching-chiang, a muslim general, served as an advisor to chiang kai-shek. ma buqing was another muslim general who fled to taiwan along with chiang. his government donated money to build the taipei grand mosque on taiwan.[137]

relationship with buddhists and christians[edit]
chiang had uneasy relations with the tibetans. he fought against them in the sino-tibetan war, and he supported the muslim general ma bufang in his war against tibetan rebels in qinghai. chiang ordered ma bufang to prepare his islamic army to invade tibet several times, to deter tibetan independence, and threatened them with aerial bombardment.[citation needed] after the war, chiang appointed ma bufang as ambassador to saudi arabia.
chiang incorporated methodist values into the new life movement under the influence of his wife. dancing and western music were discouraged. in one incident, several youths splashed acid on people wearing western clothing, although chiang was not directly responsible for these incidents. despite being a methodist, he made reference to the buddha in his diary, and encouraged the establishment of a buddhist political party under master taixu.
according to jehovah's witnesses some of their members travelled to chonqqing and spoke to him personally while distributing their literature there during the second world war.[138]

honours[edit]
this section needs additional citations for verification. please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed.find sources: "chiang kai-shek" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · jstor (october 2018) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
republic of china national honours
order of national glory
order of blue sky and white sun, 1st class
order of the sacred tripod
order of brilliant jade
order of propitious clouds
order of the cloud and banner
order of brilliant star
honour sabre of the awakened lion
foreign honours
 dominican republic:
order of merit of duarte, sánchez and mella (january 1940)
order of christopher columbus (july 1948)
grand cross of order of christopher columbus (october 1971)
 philippines:
chief commander of the philippine legion of honor (1949)[139]
grand collar of the ancient order of sikatuna (2 may 1960)[140]
 united states:
chief commander of the legion of merit (9 july 1943)[141]
distinguished service medal (u.s. army) (march 1946)
 south korea: order of merit for national foundation (27 november 1953)
 thailand: order of the rajamitrabhorn (5 june 1963)
 colombia: order of boyaca (october, 1963)
 united kingdom: order of the bath (1941)
 peru: order of the sun of peru (october 1944)
 czechoslovakia: order of the white lion (30 may 1945)
 france: legion of honour (9 january 1945)
 chile: order of merit (chile) (29 january 1944)
 mexico: order of the aztec eagle (april 1945)
 kingdom of greece: order of the redeemer (22 march 1957)
 jordan: supreme order of the renaissance (9 march 1959)
 brazil: order of the southern cross (1944)
 italy: order of saints maurice and lazarus (april 1948)
 sweden: royal order of the seraphim (4 june 1948)
 spanish republic: order of isabella the catholic (may 1936)
 venezuela: order of the liberator (july 1954)
 south vietnam: kim khanh medal (january 1960)
 belgium: order of leopold (belgium) (4 june 1946)
 malawi: order of the lion (malawi)(5 august 1967)
 bolivia: order of the condor of the andes (march 1966)
 gambia: order of the republic of the gambia (november 1972)
 argentina: order of the liberator general san martín (october 1960)
 guatemala: order of the quetzal (7 december 1956)
 nicaragua:
national order of miguel larreynaga (november 1974)
order of ruben dario(october 1958)
 panama: order of vasco núñez de balboa (february 1960)
 paraguay: collar of marshal francisco solano lopez grade of national order of merit (may 1962)
see also[edit]


biography portal
taiwan portal
china portal
world war ii portal
cold war portal
chekiang province, republic of china
chiang kai-shek memorial hall
chiang kai-shek memorial song
chiang kai-shek statues
cihu mausoleum
claire lee chennault
flying tigers
free area of the republic of china
guesthouses of chiang kai-shek
history of the republic of china
list of kidnappings
politics of the republic of china
republic of china (1912–1949)
republic of china armed forces
shilin official residence
sino-german cooperation until 1941
references[edit]


^ a b pakula, hannah (2009). the last empress: madame chiang kai-shek and the birth of modern china. simon and schuster. p. 346. isbn 1-4391-4893-7. retrieved june 28, 2010..mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/65/lock-green.svg/9px-lock-green.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d6/lock-gray-alt-2.svg/9px-lock-gray-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/aa/lock-red-alt-2.svg/9px-lock-red-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration{color:#555}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration span{border-bottom:1px dotted;cursor:help}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/wikisource-logo.svg/12px-wikisource-logo.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output code.cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:inherit;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#33aa33;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-right{padding-right:0.2em}

^ "chiang kai-shek". random house webster's unabridged dictionary.

^ zarrow, peter gue (2005). china in war and revolution, 1895–1949. pp. 230–231.

^ will of chiang kai-shek at wikisource.

^ tong, hollington k. (1953). chiang kai-shek. china publishing company. p. 5. |access-date= requires |url= (help)

^ http://edizionicafoscari.unive.it/media/pdf/books/978-88-6969-127-0/978-88-6969-127-0-ch-01.pdf

^ taylor 2009, pp. 24, 31

^ loh, pichon (1971). the early chiang kai-shek. columbia university press. p. 27.

^ loh 1971, pp. 20, 133.

^ 
taylor 2009, pp. 25–26

^ chan, anthony b. (2010), arming the chinese: the western armaments trade in warlord china, 1920–1928, vancouver: ubc press, p. 106.

^ hahn (1955), p. 42.

^ dreyer, edward l. (1995), china at war, 1901–1941, abingdon: routledge, p. 104.

^ pakula (2009), p. 95–97.

^ a b biographical dictionary of republican china, vol. iii, "chiang kai-shek", p. 322.

^ a b ships of china, jingdao chuban youxian gongsi, 1988, p. 115. (in chinese) & (in english)

^ jay taylor (2000). the generalissimo's son: chiang ching-kuo and the revolutions in china and taiwan. harvard university press. p. 59. isbn 0-674-00287-3. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ fenby, jonathan (2005). chiang kai shek: china's generalissimo and the nation he lost. carroll & graf publishers. p. 205. isbn 0-7867-1484-0. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ pakula, hannah (2009). the last empress: madame chiang kai-shek and the birth of modern china. simon and schuster. p. 247. isbn 1-4391-4893-7. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ taylor, jay (2000). the generalissimo's son: chiang ching-kuo and the revolutions in china and taiwan. harvard university press. p. 74. isbn 0-674-00287-3. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ eileen, tamura (1998). china: understanding its past. p. 174.

^ van de ven, hans (2003), war and nationalism in china: 1925–1945, studies in the modern history of asia, london: routledgecurzon, p. 101, isbn 978-0415145718.

^ a b c van de ven (2003), p. 103.

^ ah xiang (1998), "the zhongshan warship incident" (pdf), tragedy of chinese revolution, p. 1

^ a b ah xiang (1998), p. 3.

^ a b taylor 2009, p. 57

^ '"chiang kai-shek's secret past: the memoir of his second wife, ch'en chieh-ju" by ch'en chieh-ju and george chan, ed. by lloyd e. eastman, westview press, boulder, 1993, pp. 248–249.

^ a b taylor 2009, p. 91

^ jay taylor (2000). the generalissimo's son: chiang ching-kuo and the revolutions in china and taiwan. harvard university press. p. 42. isbn 0-674-00287-3. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ a b jay taylor (2009). the generalissimo: chiang kai-shek and the struggle for modern china, volume 39. harvard university press. p. 602. isbn 0-674-03338-8. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ robert carver north (1963). moscow and chinese communists. stanford university press. p. 94. isbn 0-8047-0453-8. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ mayhew, bradley (march 2004). shanghai (2nd ed.). lonely planet. p. 51. isbn 978-1-74059-308-3. retrieved july 22, 2009.

^ barnouin, barbara and yu changgen. zhou enlai: a political life. hong kong: chinese university of hong kong, 2006. isbn 962-996-280-2. retrieved at <https://books.google.com/books?id=nztlwqexf2ic> on march 12, 2011. p. 38

^ maurice meisner (2006-12-22). mao's china: a history of the people's republic. google books. isbn 978-0-7456-3106-6. retrieved 22 july 2009.

^ "generalissimo and madame chiang kai-shek". time. jan 3, 1938. retrieved may 22, 2011.

^ taylor 2009, p. 84

^ joseph t. chen (1971). the may fourth movement in shanghai: the making of a social movement in modern china. brill archive. p. 13. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ frank j. coppa (2006). encyclopedia of modern dictators: from napoleon to the present. peter lang. p. 58. isbn 0-8204-5010-3. retrieved may 15, 2011.

^ parks m. coble (1986). the shanghai capitalists and the nationalist government, 1927–1937. volume 94 of harvard east asian monographs (2, reprint, illustrated ed.). harvard univ asia center. p. 263. isbn 0-674-80536-4. retrieved may 15, 2011.

^ a b parks m. coble (1986). the shanghai capitalists and the nationalist government, 1927–1937. volume 94 of harvard east asian monographs (2, reprint, illustrated ed.). harvard univ asia center. p. 264. isbn 0-674-80536-4. retrieved may 15, 2011.

^ hsiung, shih-i (1948). the life of chiang kai-shek. peter davies. p. 211. retrieved 2014-06-28.

^ hahn, emily (1955). chiang kai-shek: an unauthorized biography. doubleday. p. 84. retrieved 2014-06-28.

^ school of social science georgia institute of technology john w. garver assistant professor (1988). chinese-soviet relations, 1937–1945 : the diplomacy of chinese nationalism: the diplomacy of chinese nationalism. oxford university press. p. 177. isbn 0195363744. retrieved 2014-06-28.

^ "saddam hussein, hitler, stalin, mao, & more: 13 deadliest dictators (photos)". daily beast.

^ "history's greatest monsters". adult learn.

^ taylor, jay (2009). the generalissimo: chiang kai-shek and the struggle for modern china. cambridge, massachusetts: belknap press of harvard university press. pp. 154–155.

^ r.j.rummel. "china's bloody century".

^ barnouin, barbara and yu changgen. zhou enlai: a political life. hong kong: chinese university of hong kong, 2006. isbn 962-996-280-2. retrieved at <https://books.google.com/books?id=nztlwqexf2ic&printsec=frontcover&dq=zhou+enlai&resnum=2&ved=0ccsq6aewaq#v=onepage> on march 12, 2011. p.38

^ taylor, jay (2009). the generalissimo: chiang kai-shek and the struggle for modern china (illustrated ed.). harvard university press. p. 93. isbn 0674033388.

^ barnouin, barbara and yu changgen. zhou enlai: a political life. hong kong: chinese university of hong kong, 2006. isbn 962-996-280-2. retrieved on march 12, 2011. pp. 74–75

^ hsiao-ting lin (2010). modern china's ethnic frontiers: a journey to the west. taylor & francis. p. 90. isbn 0-415-58264-4. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ jonathan neaman lipman (1 july 1998). familiar strangers: a history of muslims in northwest china. university of washington press. pp. 197–. isbn 978-0-295-80055-4.

^ "china: he who has reason". time. oct 5, 1942. retrieved april 11, 2011.

^ lai, dinesh. "indo-tibet-china conflict". retrieved december 1, 2018.

^ lin, hsiao-ting. "war or stratagem? reassessing china's military advance towards tibet, 1942–1943". retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ david p. barrett; lawrence n. shyu (2001). china in the anti-japanese war, 1937–1945: politics, culture and society. peter lang. p. 98. isbn 0-8204-4556-8.

^ university of cambridge. mongolia & inner asia studies unit (2002). inner asia, volume 4, issues 1–2. the white horse press for the mongolia and inner asia studies unit at the university of cambridge. p. 204. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ paul kocot nietupski (1999). labrang: a tibetan buddhist monastery at the crossroads of four civilizations. snow lion publications. p. 35. isbn 1-55939-090-5.

^ "battle of asia: land of three rivers". time. may 4, 1942. retrieved april 28, 2010.

^ romanus and sunderland, stilwell's command problem, p. 369.

^ "true airpower". wings: clash of wings. episode 11. discovery channel.

^ jonathan fenby (2005). chiang kai shek: china's generalissimo and the nation he lost. carroll & graf publishers. p. 256. isbn 0-7867-1484-0. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ barbara wertheim tuchman (1985). the march of folly: from troy to vietnam. random house, inc. p. 235. isbn 0-345-30823-9. retrieved november 28, 2010.

^ larry h. addington (2000). america's war in vietnam: a short narrative history. indiana university press. p. 30. isbn 0-253-21360-6. retrieved november 28, 2010.

^ hugh dyson walker (november 2012). east asia: a new history. authorhouse. pp. 621–. isbn 978-1-4772-6516-1.

^ peter neville (2007). britain in vietnam: prelude to disaster, 1945-6. psychology press. p. 119. isbn 0-415-35848-5. retrieved november 28, 2010.

^ van nguyen duong (2008). the tragedy of the vietnam war: a south vietnamese officer's analysis. mcfarland. p. 21. isbn 0-7864-3285-3. retrieved november 28, 2010.

^ stein tønnesson (2010). vietnam 1946: how the war began. university of california press. p. 41. isbn 0-520-25602-6. retrieved november 28, 2010.

^ elizabeth jane errington (1990). the vietnam war as history: edited by elizabeth jane errington and b.j.c. mckercher. greenwood publishing group. p. 63. isbn 0-275-93560-4. retrieved november 28, 2010.

^ "the vietnam war seeds of conflict 1945–1960". the history place. 1999. retrieved december 28, 2010.

^ foreign relations of the united state: the conferences at cairo and tehran, 1943 p. 324 "chinese summary record".

^ gillin, donald g. and etter, charles. "staying on: japanese soldiers and civilians in china, 1945–1949." the journal of asian studies. vol. 42, no. 3, may, 1983. pp. 499–500. retrieved at: <https://www.jstor.org/stable/2055515>. february 23, 2011.

^ gillin, donald g. and etter, charles. "staying on: japanese soldiers and civilians in china, 1945–1949." the journal of asian studies. vol. 42, no. 3, may, 1983. p. 505. retrieved at: <https://www.jstor.org/stable/2055515>. february 23, 2011.

^ odd arne westad, restless empire: china and the world since 1750 (2012) p. 291

^ haynes, john earl; harvey klehr, venona: decoding soviet espionage in america, new haven: yale university press (2000), isbn 0-300-08462-5, pp. 142–145

^ jonathan fenby (2005). chiang kai shek: china's generalissimo and the nation he lost. carroll & graf publishers. p. 414. isbn 0-7867-1484-0. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ jonathan fenby (2005). chiang kai shek: china's generalissimo and the nation he lost. carroll & graf publishers. p. 413. isbn 0-7867-1484-0. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ frederic e. wakeman (2003). spymaster: dai li and the chinese secret service. university of california press. p. 75. isbn 0-520-23407-3. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ jonathan fenby (2005). chiang kai shek: china's generalissimo and the nation he lost. carroll & graf publishers. p. 460. isbn 0-7867-1484-0. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ bethell, tom (2007). "hoover archives: chiang kai-shek and the struggle for china". hoover.org. the hoover institution. archived from the original on july 30, 2007. retrieved november 7, 2014.

^ ray huang, cong dalishi jiaodu du jiang jieshi riji (reading chiang kai-shek's dairy from a macro-history perspective), chinatimes publishing press, taipei, 1994, pp. 441–43

^ spence, jonathan d. the search for modern china, w.w. norton and company. 1999. isbn 0-393-97351-4. p. 486

^ a b c gillin, donald g.  warlord: yen hsi-shan in shansi province 1911–1949. princeton, new jersey: princeton university press. 1967. p. 289

^ a b gillin, donald g.  warlord: yen hsi-shan in shansi province 1911–1949. princeton, new jersey: princeton university press. 1967. p. 290

^ gillin, donald g.  warlord: yen hsi-shan in shansi province 1911–1949. princeton, new jersey: princeton university press. 1967. p. 291

^ "china: return of the gimo".  time magazine. monday, mar. 13, 1950. retrieved at <http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,812143,00.html> on may 16, 2011.

^ roc chronology: jan 1911 – dec 2000

^ "muslims in taiwan". government information office (roc). archived from the original on 2007-01-13.

^ andrew d. w. forbes (1986). warlords and muslims in chinese central asia: a political history of republican sinkiang 1911–1949. cambridge, england: cup archive. p. 225. isbn 0-521-25514-7. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ dale c. tatum (2002). who influenced whom?: lessons from the cold war. university press of america. p. 118. isbn 0-7618-2444-8. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ john w. garver (1997). the sino-american alliance: nationalist china and american cold war strategy in asia. m.e. sharpe. p. 169. isbn 0-7656-0025-0. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ "ceremonies held to commemorate 228 incident victims (2014/02/28)". englishnews.ftv.com.tw.

^ huang, tai-lin (20 may 2005). "white terror exhibit unveils part of the truth". taipei times. p. 2.

^ a b gillin, donald g. and etter, charles. "staying on: japanese soldiers and civilians in china, 1945–1948". the journal of asian studies. vol. 42, no. 3, may 1983. p. 516. jstor 2055515.

^ a b peter r. moody (1977). opposition and dissent in contemporary china. hoover press. p. 302. isbn 0-8179-6771-0. retrieved november 30, 2010.

^ jay taylor (2000). the generalissimo's son: chiang ching-kuo and the revolutions in china and taiwan. harvard university press. p. 195. isbn 0-674-00287-3. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ nançy bernkopf tucker (1983). patterns in the dust: chinese-american relations and the recognition controversy, 1949–1950. columbia university press. p. 181. isbn 0-231-05362-2. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ jay taylor (2009). the generalissimo: chiang kai-shek and the struggle for modern china, volume 39. harvard university press. p. 402. isbn 0-674-03338-8. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ jonathan fenby (2005). chiang kai shek: china's generalissimo and the nation he lost. carroll & graf publishers. p. 337. isbn 0-7867-1484-0. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ hannah pakula (2009). the last empress: madame chiang kai-shek and the birth of modern china. simon and schuster. p. 531. isbn 1-4391-4893-7. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ laura tyson li (2007). madame chiang kai-shek: china's eternal first lady. grove press. p. 448. isbn 0-8021-4322-9. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ shih-i hsiung (1948). the life of chiang kai-shek. peter davies. p. 256. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ stéphane a. dudoignon, hisao komatsu, yasushi kosugi (2006). intellectuals in the modern islamic world: transmission, transformation, communication. taylor & francis. p. 134. isbn 0-415-36835-9. retrieved june 28, 2010.cs1 maint: uses authors parameter (link)

^ hartford seminary foundation (1941). the moslem world, volumes 31–34. hartford seminary foundation. p. 183. retrieved may 8, 2011.

^ jieru chen; lloyd e. eastman (1993). chiang kai-shek's secret past: the memoir of his second wife, chʻen chieh-ju. westview press. p. 236. isbn 0-8133-1825-4. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ hans j. van de ven (2003). war and nationalism in china, 1925–1945. psychology press. p. 100. isbn 0-415-14571-6. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ linda chao; ramon h. myers (1998). the first chinese democracy: political life in the republic of china on taiwan. johns hopkins university press. p. 45. isbn 0-8018-5650-7. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ kai-shek chiang (1946). president chiang kai-shek's selected speeches and messages, 1937–1945. china cultural service. p. 137. oclc 3376275. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ hsiao-ting lin (2006). tibet and nationalist china's frontier: intrigues and ethnopolitics, 1928–49 (pdf). ubc press. p. 29. isbn 0-7748-1301-6. archived from the original (pdf) on may 13, 2011. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ murray a. rubinstein (1994). the other taiwan: 1945 to the present. m.e. sharpe. p. 416. isbn 1-56324-193-5. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ james a. millward (2007). eurasian crossroads: a history of xinjiang. columbia university press. p. 208. isbn 0-231-13924-1. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ paul hibbert clyde; burton f. beers (1971). the far east: a history of the western impact and the eastern response (1830–1970). prentice-hall. p. 409. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ "chiang kai-shek's former homes are open to tourists". the economist. 5 october 2017.

^ bernstein, richard (3 september 2015). "assassinating chiang kai-shek". foreign policy. retrieved 28 may 2017.

^ kilpatrick, ryan (13 january 2015). "'retake the mainland': chiang kai-shek bronze marches on zhejiang hometown". that's magazine. retrieved 28 may 2017.

^ fenby, jonathan. history of modern china. p. 279.

^ mitter, rana. modern china. p. 73.

^ in an interview reported in "has man a future?", p. 224

^ ch'en, chieh-ju; lee, james (1993).  eastman, lloyd e., ed. chiang kai-shek's secret past: the memoir of his second wife, ch'en chieh-ju. boulder, colorado: westview press. isbn 0-8133-1824-6. retrieved november 10, 2014.

^ chiang kai-shek's secret past. pp. 83–85.

^ keiji furuya; chʻun-ming chang; chunming zhang (1981). chiang kai-shek, his life and times (abridged english ed.). st. john's university. p. 3. isbn 0-87075-025-9.

^ keiji furuya; chʻun-ming chang; chunming zhang (1981). chiang kai-shek, his life and times (abridged english ed.). st. john's university. p. 3. isbn 0-87075-025-9.

^ http://www.zjda.gov.cn/zjdazz/wzdd/201202/t20120215_193583.htm

^ http://www.kanunu8.com/book3/5935/102582.html

^ http://m.sangwu123.com/html/36/36479/8606740.html

^ "archived copy". archived from the original on 2017-01-04. retrieved 2016-10-04.cs1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ http://big5.xinhuanet.com/gate/big5/news.xinhuanet.com/xhfk/2010-12/14/c_12876888_2.htm

^ http://en.epubook.com/read.php?id=4443

^ jay taylor. the generalissimo: chiang kai-shek and the struggle for modern china. (cambridge, massachusetts: belknap press of harvard university press,  2009) p. 2.

^ stephen r. mackinnon; diana lary; ezra f. vogel (2007). familiar china at war: regions of china, 1937–1945. stanford university press. p. 77. isbn 0-8047-5509-4. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ jay taylor (2009). government the generalissimo: chiang kai-shek and the struggle for modern china. harvard university press. p. 93. isbn 0-674-03338-8. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ stéphane a. dudoignon; hisao komatsu; yasushi kosugi (2006). intellectuals in the modern islamic world: transmission, transformation, communication. taylor & francis. pp. 135, 336. isbn 0-415-36835-9. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ leif o. manger (1999). muslim diversity: local islam in global contexts. routledge. p. 127. isbn 0-7007-1104-x. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ gladney, dru c. (2004). dislocating china: reflections on muslims, minorities and other subaltern subjects. c. hurst & co. publishers. p. 321. isbn 1-85065-324-0.

^ maris boyd gillette (2000). between mecca and beijing: modernization and consumption among urban chinese muslims. stanford university press. pp. 79, 80. isbn 0-8047-3694-4. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ john l. esposito (1999). the oxford history of islam. oxford university press us. p. 458. isbn 0-19-510799-3. retrieved june 28, 2010.

^ [1]

^ [2]

^ "briefer on the philippine legion of honor". official gazette of the republic of the philippines.

^ "the order of sikatuna". official gazette of the republic of the philippines.

^ "chiang kaishek biography". world war ii database.


further reading[edit]
.mw-parser-output .refbegin{font-size:90%;margin-bottom:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indents>ul{list-style-type:none;margin-left:0}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indents>ul>li,.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indents>dl>dd{margin-left:0;padding-left:3.2em;text-indent:-3.2em;list-style:none}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-100{font-size:100%}
ch'en chieh-ju. 1993. chiang kai-shek's secret past: the memoirs of his second wife. westview press. isbn 0-8133-1825-4
crozier, brian. 2009. the man who lost china. isbn 0-684-14686-x
fairbank, john king, and denis twitchett, eds. 1983. the cambridge history of china: volume 12, republican china, 1912–1949, part 1. isbn 0-521-23541-3
fenby, jonathan. 2003. generalissimo chiang kai-shek and the china he lost. the free press, isbn 0-7432-3144-9
li, laura tyson. 2006. madame chiang kai-shek: china's eternal first lady. grove press. isbn 0-8021-4322-9
may, ernest r. 2002. "1947–48: when marshall kept the u.s. out of war in china." journal of military history 66(4): 1001–1010. issn 0899-3718 fulltext: in swetswise and jstor
pakula, hannah, the last empress: madame chiang kai-shek and the birth of modern china (london, weidenfeld, 2009). isbn 978-0-297-85975-8
romanus, charles f., and riley sunderland. 1959. time runs out in cbi. official u.s. army history online edition
sainsbury, keith. 1985. the turning point: roosevelt, stalin, churchill, and chiang-kai-shek, 1943. the moscow, cairo, and teheran conferences. oxford university press. isbn 0-19-285172-1
seagrave, sterling. 1996. the soong dynasty. corgi books. isbn 0-552-14108-9
stueck, william. 1984. the wedemeyer mission: american politics and foreign policy during the cold war. university of georgia press. isbn 0-8203-0717-3
tang tsou. 1963. america's failure in china, 1941–50. university of california press. isbn 0-226-81516-1
taylor, jay. 2009. the generalissimo: chiang kai-shek and the struggle for modern china. belknap press of harvard university press, cambridge, massachusetts isbn 978-0-674-03338-2
tuchman, barbara w. 1971. stillwell and the american experience in china, 1911–45. isbn 0-8021-3852-7
van de ven, hans, et al. eds.  negotiating china's destiny in world war ii (stanford university press, 2014). 336 pp. online review

external links[edit]

chiang kai-shekat wikipedia's sister projects


definitions from wiktionary
media from wikimedia commons
news from wikinews
quotations from wikiquote
texts from wikisource
textbooks from wikibooks
resources from wikiversity



obituary, ny times, april 6, 1975, the life of chiang kai-shek: a leader who was thrust aside by revolution
roc government biography
time magazine's "man and wife of the year", 1937
the national chiang kai-shek memorial hall official site
the chungcheng cultural and educational foundation
generalissimo chiang kai-shek association hong kong
order of generalissimo chiang kai-shek supplementing the act of surrender – by japan on 9 september 1945
family tree of his descendants (in simplified chinese)
the chiang kai-shek index at the franklin d. roosevelt presidential library and museum
1966 gio biographical video
"the memorial song of late president chiang kai-shek" (ministry of national defence of roc)
chiang kai-shek biography – from spartacus educational
the collected wartime messages of generalissimo chiang kai shek at archive.org
the national chiang kai-shek cultural center official site
chiang kai-shek diaries at the hoover institution archives
[3]
newspaper clippings about  chiang kai-shek in the 20th century press archives of the german national library of economics (zbw)


political offices


preceded bytan yankai

 chairman of the national government of china1928–1931

succeeded bylin sen


preceded byt. v. soong

 premier of the republic of china1930–1931

succeeded bychen mingshu


preceded bynone

 chairman of the national military council1932–1946

succeeded bynone


preceded bywang jingwei

 premier of the republic of china1935–1938

succeeded byh. h. kung


preceded byhsiang-hsi kung

 premier of the republic of china1939–1945

succeeded byt. v. soong


preceded bylin sen

 chairman of the national government of china1943–1948

succeeded byhimselfas president of the republic of china


preceded byt. v. soong

 premier of the republic of china1947

succeeded byzhang qun


preceded byhimselfas chairman of the national government of china

 president of the republic of china1948–1975li zongren (acting)january 21, 1949 to march 1, 1950

succeeded byyen chia-kan


party political offices


preceded byzhang renjie

 chairman of the central executive committee of the kuomintang1926–1927

succeeded bywoo tsin-hang and li yuying


preceded byhu hanmin

 chairman of the central executive committee of the kuomintang1936–1938

succeeded byhimself as director general of the kuomintang


preceded byhimself as chairman of the kuomintang

 director-general of the kuomintang1938–1975

succeeded bychiang ching-kuoas chairman of the kuomintang


military offices


preceded byoffice created

 commander-in-chief of the national revolutionary army1925–1947

succeeded byoffice abolished


academic offices


preceded byoffice created

 commandant of the whampoa military academy1924–1947

succeeded byguan linzheng


vtepresidents of the republic of china
taiwan
republic of china (1912–1949)
government of the republic of china
list of presidents of the republic of china
provisional government(1912–1913)
sun yat-sen
yuan shikai
beiyang government(1913–1928)
yuan shikai
li yuanhong
feng guozhang
xu shichang
zhou ziqi
li yuanhong
gao lingwei
cao kun
huang fu
duan qirui
hu weide
yan huiqing
du xigui
gu weijun
zhang zuolin
nationalist government(1928–1948)
tan yankai
chiang kai-shek
lin sen
chiang kai-shek
constitutional governmentindirect elections (1948–1996)
chiang kai-shek
li zongren
yan xishan
chiang kai-shek
yen chia-kan
chiang ching-kuo
lee teng-hui
constitutional governmentdirect elections (since 1996)
lee teng-hui
chen shui-bian
ma ying-jeou
tsai ing-wen
italics indicates acting president
xia → shang → zhou → qin → han → 3 kingdoms → jìn / 16 kingdoms → s. dynasties / n. dynasties → sui → tang → 5 dynasties & 10 kingdoms → liao / song / w. xia / jīn → yuan → ming → qing → roc / prc
vteheads of government of the republic of chinapremiers of cabinet
tang shaoyi
lou tseng-tsiang
zhao bingjun
duan qirui*
xiong xiling
sun baoqi*
secretaries of state
xu shichang
lou tseng-tsiang*
premiers of state council
duan qirui
wu tingfang*
li jingxi
prime minister of the great qing
zhang xun (under restored qing dynasty)
premiers of state council
duan qirui
wang daxie*
wang shizhen*
qian nengxun*
gong xinzhan*
jin yunpeng
sa zhenbing
yan huiqing*
liang shiyi
zhou ziqi*
wang chonghui*
wang zhengting*
zhang shaozeng
gao lingwei
sun baoqi
vi kyuin wellington koo*
huang fu*
xu shiying
jia deyao*
hu weide*
du xigui*
pan fu
presidents of executive yuan(mainland china)
tan yankai
t. v. soong
chiang kai-shek
chen mingshu
sun fo
wang jingwei
h. h. kung
chang ch'ün
weng wenhao
he yingqin
presidents of executive yuan(taiwan)
yan xishan
chen cheng
yu hung-chun
yen chia-kan
chiang ching-kuo
sun yun-suan
yu kuo-hwa
lee huan
hau pei-tsun
lien chan
vincent siew
tang fei
chang chun-hsiung
yu shyi-kun
frank hsieh
su tseng-chang
liu chao-shiuan
wu den-yih
sean chen
jiang yi-huah
mao chi-kuo
chang san-cheng
lin chuan
william lai
*acting
vteleaders of the kuomintang
song jiaoren
sun yat-sen
zhang renjie
hu hanmin
wang jingwei
chiang kai-shek
chiang ching-kuo
lee teng-hui
lien chan
ma ying-jeou
wu po-hsiung (acting)
chiang pin-kung (acting)
wu po-hsiung
ma ying-jeou
wu den-yih (acting)
eric chu
huang min-hui (acting)
hung hsiu-chu
lin junq-tzer (acting)
wu den-yih

vte warlord era 1915–19241925–1934factions
1915twenty-one demands1915–1916empire of china (yuan shikai)national protection war1916death of yuan shikai1917manchu restoration1917–1922constitutional protection movement1917–1929golok rebellion1918–1920siberian intervention1919paris peace conferenceshandong problemmay fourth movement1919–1921occupation of outer mongolia1920zhili–anhui war1920–1921guangdong–guangxi war19211st national cpc congress1921–1922washington naval conference1922first zhili–fengtian war1923–1927first united front1924second zhili–fengtian warbeijing coup

1925yunnan–guangxi warmay thirtieth movement1925–1926anti-fengtian war1926zhongshan warship incident1926–1928northern expeditionnanjing–wuhan splitnationalist-communist civil war1927shanghai massacre1927–1930muslim conflict in gansu1928jinan incidenthuanggutun incidentlooting of the eastern mausoleumflag replacement of the northeast1928–1929third red spears' uprising in shandong1929warlord rebellion in northeastern shandong (incl. beijing revolt)sino-soviet conflict1930central plains war1930–1932sino-tibetan war / qinghai–tibet war1931–1935kumul rebellion / soviet invasion of xinjiang1932han–liu war1934war in ningxia

yuan shikai
anhui
communications
zhili
research
fengtian (zhili army)
northeastern army
shanxi
guominjun
ma
xinjiang
yunnan
sichuan
old guangxi
new guangxi (guangdong)
kuomintang (kmt)
communist party (cpc)
republic of china (1912–1949)
vtechinese civil war
principal belligerents and campaigns
 nationalist party /  republic of china ( national revolutionary army → republic of china armed forces)
 communist party /  people's republic of china ( red army →  8th route army, n4a, etc. →  people's liberation army)

pre-1945post-1945current issues
 1924 first united front 1926 canton coup 1927 nanking incidentshanghai communeshanghai massacrenanjing-wuhan split715 incidentnanchang uprisingautumn harvest uprisingguangzhou uprising 1929 sino-soviet conflict 1930–1934 encirclement campaigns 1931–1934 chinese soviet republic 1933–1934 fujian people's government 1934–1936 long march 1936 xi'an incident 1937–1946 second united front 1944 dixie mission

 1945 chongqing negotiationsdouble tenth agreement 1946 jiaochangkou incident 1945-1947 marshall mission 1945–1949 operation beleaguer 1946–1949 revolution 1948 ss kiangya incidentliaoshen campaign 1948–1949 huaihai campaignpingjin campaign 1949 taiping steamer incidentyangtze river crossing campaignincorporation of xinjiang 1950–1958 kuomintang islamic insurgency 1950 hainan island campaignwanshan archipelago campaignbattle of chamdo (incorporation of tibet) 1955 first taiwan strait crisis 1958 second taiwan strait crisis (jinmen crisis) 1960–1961 china–burma border 1996 third taiwan strait crisis 2005–present pan-blue visits

political status of taiwan
chinese unification
taiwan independence movement
cross-strait relations

vtecold war
usa
ussr
anzus
nato
non-aligned movement
seato
warsaw pact
cold war ii
1940s
morgenthau plan
hukbalahap rebellion
jamaican conflict
dekemvriana
percentages agreement
yalta conference
guerrilla war in the baltic states
forest brothers
operation priboi
operation jungle
occupation of the baltic states
cursed soldiers
operation unthinkable
operation downfall
potsdam conference
gouzenko affair
division of korea
operation masterdom
operation beleaguer
operation blacklist forty
iran crisis of 1946
greek civil war
baruch plan
corfu channel incident
turkish straits crisis
restatement of policy on germany
first indochina war
truman doctrine
asian relations conference
may 1947 crises
marshall plan
comecon
1948 czechoslovak coup d'état
al-wathbah uprising
1947–1949 palestine war
1947–1948 civil war in mandatory palestine
1948 arab–israeli war
1948 palestinian exodus
tito–stalin split
berlin blockade
western betrayal
iron curtain
eastern bloc
western bloc
chinese civil war (second round)
malayan emergency
albanian subversion
1950s
papua conflict
bamboo curtain
korean war
mccarthyism
algerian war
egyptian revolution of 1952
1953 iranian coup d'état
uprising of 1953 in east germany
bricker amendment
1954 guatemalan coup d'état
partition of vietnam
jebel akhdar war
vietnam war
first taiwan strait crisis
cyprus crisis (1955–64)
geneva summit (1955)
bandung conference
poznań 1956 protests
hungarian revolution of 1956
yemeni–adenese clan violence
suez crisis
"we will bury you"
ifni war
operation gladio
arab cold war
syrian crisis of 1957
1958 lebanon crisis
iraqi 14 july revolution
sputnik crisis
second taiwan strait crisis
1959 tibetan uprising
1959 mosul uprising
cuban revolution
kitchen debate
sino-soviet split
1960s
congo crisis
simba rebellion
1960 u-2 incident
bay of pigs invasion
1960 turkish coup d'état
soviet–albanian split
iraqi–kurdish conflict
first iraqi–kurdish war
berlin crisis of 1961
berlin wall
dirty war (mexico)
portuguese colonial war
angolan war of independence
guinea-bissau war of independence
mozambican war of independence
cuban missile crisis
el porteñazo
sino-indian war
communist insurgency in sarawak
iraqi ramadan revolution
eritrean war of independence
sand war
north yemen civil war
aden emergency
1963 syrian coup d'état
assassination of john f. kennedy
vietnam war
shifta war
guatemalan civil war
colombian conflict
1964 brazilian coup d'état
dominican civil war
rhodesian bush war
south african border war
transition to the new order (indonesia)
domino theory
asean declaration
laotian civil war
1966 syrian coup d'état
argentine revolution
korean dmz conflict
greek military junta of 1967–1974
years of lead (italy)
uss pueblo incident
six-day war
war of attrition
dhofar rebellion
al-wadiah war
biafran war
protests of 1968
french may
tlatelolco massacre
cultural revolution
prague spring
1968 polish political crisis
communist insurgency in malaysia
invasion of czechoslovakia
iraqi ba'athist revolution
1969 libyan coup d'état
goulash communism
sino-soviet border conflict
cpp–npa–ndf rebellion
corrective move
1970s
détente
nuclear non-proliferation treaty
black september in jordan
corrective movement (syria)
western sahara conflict
nicaraguan revolution
cambodian civil war
vietnam war
koza riot
realpolitik
ping-pong diplomacy
uganda–tanzania war
1971 turkish military memorandum
corrective revolution (egypt)
four power agreement on berlin
bangladesh liberation war
1972 nixon visit to china
north yemen-south yemen border conflict of 1972
yemenite war of 1972
communist insurgency in bangladesh
eritrean civil wars
1973 uruguayan coup d'état
1973 chilean coup d'état
yom kippur war
1973 oil crisis
carnation revolution
spanish transition
metapolitefsi
strategic arms limitation talks
second iraqi–kurdish war
angolan civil war
mozambican civil war
oromo conflict
ogaden war
western sahara war
ethiopian civil war
lebanese civil war
sino-albanian split
cambodian–vietnamese war
operation condor
dirty war (argentina)
1976 argentine coup d'état
libyan–egyptian war
german autumn
korean air lines flight 902
ndf rebellion
chadian–libyan conflict
yemenite war of 1979
grand mosque seizure
iranian revolution
saur revolution
sino-vietnamese war
new jewel movement
1979 herat uprising
seven days to the river rhine
struggle against political abuse of psychiatry in the soviet union
1980s
soviet–afghan war
1980 and 1984 summer olympics boycotts
peruvian conflict
1980 turkish coup d'état
gulf of sidra incident
casamance conflict
ugandan bush war
lord's resistance army insurgency
eritrean civil wars
1982 ethiopian–somali border war
ndogboyosoi war
united states invasion of grenada
able archer 83
star wars
iran–iraq war
somali rebellion
1986 black sea incident
south yemen civil war
toyota war
1988 black sea bumping incident
bougainville civil war
8888 uprising
solidarity
soviet reaction
contras
central american crisis
ryan
korean air lines flight 007
people power revolution
glasnost
perestroika
nagorno-karabakh war
afghan civil war
united states invasion of panama
1988 polish strikes
tiananmen square protests of 1989
revolutions of 1989
fall of the berlin wall
velvet revolution
romanian revolution
peaceful revolution
die wende
1990s
mongolian revolution of 1990
gulf war
german reunification
yemeni unification
fall of communism in albania
breakup of yugoslavia
dissolution of czechoslovakia
dissolution of the soviet union
frozen conflicts
abkhazia
china-taiwan
korea
puerto rico
kosovo
nagorno-karabakh
south ossetia
transnistria
sino-indian border dispute
north borneo dispute
foreign policy
truman doctrine
containment
eisenhower doctrine
domino theory
hallstein doctrine
kennedy doctrine
peaceful coexistence
ostpolitik
johnson doctrine
brezhnev doctrine
nixon doctrine
ulbricht doctrine
carter doctrine
reagan doctrine
rollback
sovereignty of puerto rico during the cold war
ideologiescapitalism
liberalism
chicago school
keynesianism
monetarism
neoclassical economics
reaganomics
supply-side economics
thatcherism
communism
socialism
marxism–leninism
castroism
eurocommunism
guevarism
hoxhaism
juche
maoism
trotskyism
naxalism
stalinism
titoism
other
imperialism
anti-imperialism
nationalism
ethnic nationalism
zionism
fascism
neo-nazism
islamism
totalitarianism
authoritarianism
autocracy
liberal democracy
illiberal democracy
guided democracy
social democracy
third-worldism
white supremacy
white nationalism
white separatism
apartheid
organizations
nato
warsaw pact
asean
cia
comecon
eec
kgb
mi6
non-aligned movement
saarc
safari club
stasi
propaganda
active measures
crusade for freedom
izvestia
pravda
radio free europe/radio liberty
red scare
tass
voice of america
voice of russia
races
arms race
nuclear arms race
space race
see also
allied intervention in the russian civil war
list of eastern bloc agents in the united states
soviet espionage in the united states
soviet union–united states relations
ussr–usa summits
russian espionage in the united states
american espionage in the soviet union and russian federation
russia–nato relations
brinkmanship
cia and the cultural cold war
cold war ii
russian revolution
war on terror

category
commons
portal
timeline
list of conflicts

vtetime persons of the year1927–1950
charles lindbergh (1927)
walter chrysler (1928)
owen d. young (1929)
mohandas gandhi (1930)
pierre laval (1931)
franklin d. roosevelt (1932)
hugh s. johnson (1933)
franklin d. roosevelt (1934)
haile selassie (1935)
wallis simpson (1936)
chiang kai-shek / soong mei-ling (1937)
adolf hitler (1938)
joseph stalin (1939)
winston churchill (1940)
franklin d. roosevelt (1941)
joseph stalin (1942)
george marshall (1943)
dwight d. eisenhower (1944)
harry s. truman (1945)
james f. byrnes (1946)
george marshall (1947)
harry s. truman (1948)
winston churchill (1949)
the american fighting-man (1950)
1951–1975
mohammed mosaddeq (1951)
elizabeth ii  (1952)
konrad adenauer (1953)
john foster dulles (1954)
harlow curtice (1955)
hungarian freedom fighters (1956)
nikita khrushchev (1957)
charles de gaulle (1958)
dwight d. eisenhower (1959)
 u.s. scientists: george beadle / charles draper / john enders / donald a. glaser / joshua lederberg / willard libby / linus pauling / edward purcell / isidor rabi / emilio segrè / william shockley / edward teller / charles townes / james van allen / robert woodward  (1960)
john f. kennedy (1961)
pope john xxiii (1962)
martin luther king jr. (1963)
lyndon b. johnson (1964)
william westmoreland (1965)
the generation twenty-five and under (1966)
lyndon b. johnson (1967)
 the apollo 8 astronauts: william anders / frank borman / jim lovell  (1968)
the middle americans (1969)
willy brandt (1970)
richard nixon (1971)
henry kissinger / richard nixon (1972)
john sirica (1973)
king faisal (1974)
 american women: susan brownmiller / kathleen byerly / alison cheek / jill conway / betty ford / ella grasso / carla hills / barbara jordan / billie jean king / susie sharp / carol sutton / addie wyatt  (1975)
1976–2000
jimmy carter (1976)
anwar sadat (1977)
deng xiaoping (1978)
ayatollah khomeini (1979)
ronald reagan (1980)
lech wałęsa (1981)
the computer (1982)
ronald reagan / yuri andropov (1983)
peter ueberroth (1984)
deng xiaoping (1985)
corazon aquino (1986)
mikhail gorbachev (1987)
the endangered earth (1988)
mikhail gorbachev (1989)
george h. w. bush (1990)
ted turner (1991)
bill clinton (1992)
 the peacemakers: yasser arafat / f. w. de klerk / nelson mandela / yitzhak rabin  (1993)
pope john paul ii (1994)
newt gingrich (1995)
david ho (1996)
andrew grove (1997)
bill clinton / ken starr (1998)
jeff bezos (1999)
george w. bush (2000)
2001–present
rudolph giuliani (2001)
 the whistleblowers: cynthia cooper / coleen rowley / sherron watkins  (2002)
the american soldier (2003)
george w. bush (2004)
 the good samaritans: bono / bill gates / melinda gates  (2005)
you (2006)
vladimir putin (2007)
barack obama (2008)
ben bernanke (2009)
mark zuckerberg (2010)
the protester (2011)
barack obama (2012)
pope francis (2013)
 ebola fighters: dr. jerry brown / dr. kent brantly /  ella watson-stryker / foday gollah / salome karwah  (2014)
angela merkel (2015)
donald trump (2016)
the silence breakers (2017)
 the guardians: jamal khashoggi / maria ressa / wa lone and kyaw soe oo / staff of the capital  (2018)
 book
vte    philippine legion of honor recipients    chief commander(punong komandante)
emilio aguinaldo
hassanal bolkiah
chiang kai-shek
dwight d. eisenhower
leonardo espina
francisco franco
josé p. laurel
douglas macarthur
ferdinand marcos
imelda marcos
sergio osmeña
jesse robredo
chino roces
franklin d. roosevelt
jaime sin
achmad sukarno
lorenzo tañada
maxwell d. taylor
claudio teehankee
grand commander(marangal na komandante)
gilbert teodoro
emilio yap
fernando zóbel de ayala
jaime zóbel de ayala
jaime augusto zóbel de ayala ii
grand officer(marangal na pinuno)
teodoro locsin jr.
commander (komandante)
benigno aquino jr.
eulogio balao
alfredo montelibano sr.
officer (pinuno)
benigno aquino jr.
manny pacquiao
legionnaire(lehiyonaryo)
escuadrón 201
teddy boy locsin
edith nourse rogers
richard sakakida

|-

authority control 
bne: xx888264
bnf: cb122188693 (data)
gnd: 11867580x
isni: 0000 0001 2144 9542
lccn: n80057046
nara: 10581212
ndl: 00320010
nkc: js20070309011
nla: 36730820
selibr: 45801
snac: w6zs2x45
sudoc: 030857066
viaf: 99276871
 worldcat identities (via viaf): 99276871




 
						retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=chiang_kai-shek&oldid=883917348"					
categories: 1887 births1975 deaths20th-century chinese heads of government20th-century chinese military personnelbaoding military academy cadetschiang kai-shekdeified chinese peoplechinese anti-communistschinese nationalistschinese methodistschinese military personnel of world war iichinese nationalist heads of statechinese revolutionariesconverts to christianityforeign recipients of the legion of meritformerly missing peoplegeneralissimoshonorary knights grand cross of the order of the bathjapanese military personnelknights of the order of the rajamitrabhornkuomintang politicians in taiwanmarshals of chinamissing person cases in chinakidnapped chinese peoplegenocide perpetratorspeople of the chinese civil warpeople of the northern expeditionpeople of the xinhai revolutionpeople of the central plains warpoliticians from ningbopremiers of the republic of chinapresidents of the republic of china on taiwanrecipients of the order of the sacred tripodrecipients of the order of the white lionrepublic of china politicians from zhejiangtaiwanese people from zhejiangtongmenghui membersworld war ii political leadersfascist rulershidden categories: pages using citations with accessdate and no urlarticles with chinese-language external linkscs1: long volume valuecs1 maint: uses authors parametercs1 maint: archived copy as titlearticles containing chinese-language textarticles with haudio microformatsarticles containing traditional chinese-language textall articles with minor pov problemsarticles with minor pov problems from july 2018wikipedia articles needing factual verification from march 2018all articles with unsourced statementsarticles with unsourced statements from february 2019wikipedia articles needing clarification from august 2018articles with unsourced statements from may 2010articles with unsourced statements from february 2011articles with unsourced statements from april 2009wikipedia articles with style issues from november 2013all articles with style issuesarticles with unsourced statements from october 2011articles needing additional references from october 2018all articles needing additional referenceswikipedia articles with bne identifierswikipedia articles with bnf identifierswikipedia articles with gnd identifierswikipedia articles with isni identifierswikipedia articles with lccn identifierswikipedia articles with nara identifierswikipedia articles with ndl identifierswikipedia articles with nkc identifierswikipedia articles with nla identifierswikipedia articles with selibr identifierswikipedia articles with snac-id identifierswikipedia articles with sudoc identifierswikipedia articles with viaf identifierswikipedia articles with worldcat-viaf identifiers 



navigation menu


personal tools

not logged intalkcontributionscreate accountlog in 



namespaces

articletalk 




variants







views

readeditview history 



more





search



 







navigation


main pagecontentsfeatured contentcurrent eventsrandom articledonate to wikipediawikipedia store 



interaction


helpabout wikipediacommunity portalrecent changescontact page 



tools


what links hererelated changesupload filespecial pagespermanent linkpage informationwikidata itemcite this page 



print/export


create a bookdownload as pdfprintable version 



in other projects


wikimedia commonswikiquotewikisource 



languages


afrikaansalemannischአማርኛالعربيةaragonésasturianuaymar aruazərbaycancaবাংলাbân-lâm-gúбашҡортсабеларускаябеларуская (тарашкевіца)‎bikol centralбългарскиbosanskibrezhonegcatalàчӑвашлаčeštinacymraegdanskdeutscheestiελληνικάespañolesperantoestremeñueuskaraفارسیfrançaisfryskgaeilgegalego贛語客家語/hak-kâ-ngî한국어hausaհայերենहिन्दीhrvatskiidobahasa indonesiaíslenskaitalianoעבריתbasa jawaಕನ್ನಡქართულიқазақшаkiswahililatinalatviešulëtzebuergeschlietuviųmagyarmalagasyമലയാളംमराठीმარგალურიمصرىمازِرونیbahasa melayumìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄монголမြန်မာဘာသာnederlandsनेपाली日本語нохчийнnorsknorsk nynorskoccitanoʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀپنجابیភាសាខ្មែរpiemontèispolskiportuguêsromânăruna simiрусскийscotssicilianuසිංහලsimple englishslovenčinaslovenščinaсрпски / srpskisrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиsuomisvenskatagalogதமிழ்татарча/tatarçaతెలుగుไทยтоҷикӣtürkçeукраїнськаاردوئۇيغۇرچە / uyghurchevahcuenghtiếng việtwalon文言winaray吴语ייִדיש粵語中文 
edit links 





 this page was last edited on 18 february 2019, at 12:25 (utc).
text is available under the creative commons attribution-sharealike license;
additional terms may apply.  by using this site, you agree to the terms of use and privacy policy. wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the wikimedia foundation, inc., a non-profit organization.


privacy policy
about wikipedia
disclaimers
contact wikipedia
developers
cookie statement
mobile view



 

 



(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgpageparsereport":{"limitreport":{"cputime":"3.316","walltime":"3.956","ppvisitednodes":{"value":41444,"limit":1000000},"ppgeneratednodes":{"value":0,"limit":1500000},"postexpandincludesize":{"value":977011,"limit":2097152},"templateargumentsize":{"value":202602,"limit":2097152},"expansiondepth":{"value":17,"limit":40},"expensivefunctioncount":{"value":31,"limit":500},"unstrip-depth":{"value":1,"limit":20},"unstrip-size":{"value":361703,"limit":5000000},"entityaccesscount":{"value":2,"limit":400},"timingprofile":["100.00% 3103.997      1 -total"," 40.44% 1255.232     28 template:infobox"," 27.70%  859.756      1 template:reflist"," 24.13%  748.845      1 template:infobox_president"," 15.42%  478.732     73 template:cite_book"," 10.54%  327.080     17 template:infobox_officeholder/office","  9.22%  286.174      1 template:infobox_chinese","  9.06%  281.091     13 template:s-aft","  8.98%  278.609     26 template:delink_question_hyphen-minus","  5.86%  181.770     13 template:lang"]},"scribunto":{"limitreport-timeusage":{"value":"1.515","limit":"10.000"},"limitreport-memusage":{"value":33624360,"limit":52428800}},"cachereport":{"origin":"mw1249","timestamp":"20190219054308","ttl":86400,"transientcontent":true}}});mw.config.set({"wgbackendresponsetime":130,"wghostname":"mw1267"});});


