



invasion of poland - wikipedia
document.documentelement.classname = document.documentelement.classname.replace( /(^|\s)client-nojs(\s|$)/, "$1client-js$2" );
(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgcanonicalnamespace":"","wgcanonicalspecialpagename":false,"wgnamespacenumber":0,"wgpagename":"invasion_of_poland","wgtitle":"invasion of poland","wgcurrevisionid":883848083,"wgrevisionid":883848083,"wgarticleid":309288,"wgisarticle":true,"wgisredirect":false,"wgaction":"view","wgusername":null,"wgusergroups":["*"],"wgcategories":["webarchive template wayback links","articles with russian-language external links","articles with inconsistent citation formats","cs1: long volume value","cs1 errors: external links","cs1 polish-language sources (pl)","articles with polish-language external links","cs1 maint: archived copy as title","use dmy dates from january 2013","articles needing additional references from august 2017","all articles needing additional references","interlanguage link template link number","all articles with unsourced statements","articles with unsourced statements from october 2013","pages with dois inactive since 2018","cs1 german-language sources (de)","commons category link is on wikidata","wikipedia articles with gnd identifiers","invasion of poland","1939 in poland","conflicts in 1939","world war ii invasions","invasions of poland","september 1939 events","october 1939 events"],"wgbreakframes":false,"wgpagecontentlanguage":"en","wgpagecontentmodel":"wikitext","wgseparatortransformtable":["",""],"wgdigittransformtable":["",""],"wgdefaultdateformat":"dmy","wgmonthnames":["","january","february","march","april","may","june","july","august","september","october","november","december"],"wgmonthnamesshort":["","jan","feb","mar","apr","may","jun","jul","aug","sep","oct","nov","dec"],"wgrelevantpagename":"invasion_of_poland","wgrelevantarticleid":309288,"wgrequestid":"xgn-0qpaicwaaedtm38aaabl","wgcspnonce":false,"wgisprobablyeditable":true,"wgrelevantpageisprobablyeditable":true,"wgrestrictionedit":[],"wgrestrictionmove":[],"wgflaggedrevsparams":{"tags":{}},"wgstablerevisionid":null,"wgcategorytreepagecategoryoptions":"{\"mode\":0,\"hideprefix\":20,\"showcount\":true,\"namespaces\":false}","wgwikieditorenabledmodules":[],"wgbetafeaturesfeatures":[],"wgmediavieweronclick":true,"wgmediaviewerenabledbydefault":true,"wgpopupsshouldsendmoduletouser":true,"wgpopupsconflictswithnavpopupgadget":false,"wgvisualeditor":{"pagelanguagecode":"en","pagelanguagedir":"ltr","pagevariantfallbacks":"en","usepageimages":true,"usepagedescriptions":true},"wgmfispagecontentmodeleditable":true,"wgmfenablefontchanger":true,"wgmfdisplaywikibasedescriptions":{"search":true,"nearby":true,"watchlist":true,"tagline":false},"wgrelatedarticles":null,"wgrelatedarticlesusecirrussearch":true,"wgrelatedarticlesonlyusecirrussearch":false,"wgwmeschemaeditattemptstepoversample":false,"wgpoweredbyhhvm":true,"wgulscurrentautonym":"english","wgnoticeproject":"wikipedia","wgcentralnoticecookiestodelete":[],"wgcentralnoticecategoriesusinglegacy":["fundraising","fundraising"],"wgwikibaseitemid":"q150812","wgscorenotelanguages":{"arabic":"العربية","catalan":"català","deutsch":"deutsch","english":"english","espanol":"español","italiano":"italiano","nederlands":"nederlands","norsk":"norsk","portugues":"português","suomi":"suomi","svenska":"svenska","vlaams":"west-vlams"},"wgscoredefaultnotelanguage":"nederlands","wgcentralauthmobiledomain":false,"wgcodemirrorenabled":true,"wgvisualeditortoolbarscrolloffset":0,"wgvisualeditorunsupportededitparams":["undo","undoafter","veswitched"],"wgeditsubmitbuttonlabelpublish":true,"oreswikiid":"enwiki","oresbaseurl":"http://ores.discovery.wmnet:8081/","oresapiversion":3});mw.loader.state({"ext.gadget.charinsert-styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site.styles":"ready","site.styles":"ready","noscript":"ready","user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site":"ready","user":"ready","user.options":"ready","user.tokens":"loading","ext.cite.styles":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.shared":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.commonprint":"ready","mediawiki.toc.styles":"ready","wikibase.client.init":"ready","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.noscript":"ready","ext.uls.interlanguage":"ready","ext.wikimediabadges":"ready","ext.3d.styles":"ready","mediawiki.skinning.interface":"ready","skins.vector.styles":"ready"});mw.loader.implement("user.tokens@0tffind",function($,jquery,require,module){/*@nomin*/mw.user.tokens.set({"edittoken":"+\\","patroltoken":"+\\","watchtoken":"+\\","csrftoken":"+\\"});
});rlpagemodules=["ext.cite.ux-enhancements","site","mediawiki.page.startup","mediawiki.page.ready","mediawiki.toc","mediawiki.searchsuggest","ext.gadget.teahouse","ext.gadget.referencetooltips","ext.gadget.watchlist-notice","ext.gadget.drn-wizard","ext.gadget.charinsert","ext.gadget.reftoolbar","ext.gadget.extra-toolbar-buttons","ext.gadget.switcher","ext.centralauth.centralautologin","mmv.head","mmv.bootstrap.autostart","ext.popups","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.init","ext.visualeditor.targetloader","ext.eventlogging","ext.wikimediaevents","ext.navigationtiming","ext.uls.eventlogger","ext.uls.init","ext.uls.compactlinks","ext.uls.interface","ext.quicksurveys.init","ext.centralnotice.geoip","ext.centralnotice.startup","skins.vector.js"];mw.loader.load(rlpagemodules);});























 





invasion of poland 
from wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 jump to navigation
jump to search
for other uses, see invasion of poland (disambiguation).


invasion of polandpart of world war ii, especially its european theaterfrom left to right: luftwaffe bombers over poland, sms schleswig-holstein attacking the westerplatte, wehrmacht soldiers destroying the polish-german border post, german tank and armored car formation, german and soviet troops shaking hands following the invasion, bombing of warsaw.date1 september – 6 october 1939(1 month and 5 days)locationpoland, eastern germany, and the free city of danzig (modern-day gdańsk)result
german and soviet victoryterritorialchanges
polish territory divided among germany, the soviet union, and the slovak client-state. free city of danzig annexed by germany. kresy annexed by soviet union.belligerents
 germany soviet union(see details) slovak republic(see details) free city of danzig


 oun
 polandcommanders and leaders

fedor von bock(army group north)gerd von rundstedt(army group south)

ferdinand čatloš(army bernolák)

mikhail kovalyov(belorussian front)semyon timoshenko(ukrainian front)
edward rydz-śmigły(marshal of poland)wacław stachiewicz(chief of the general staff)tadeusz kutrzeba(army poznań)juliusz rómmel (łódź army, warszawa army)units involved

invading  armies
 army group north 
 3rd army 
 4th army 
 army group south 
 8th army 
 10th army 
 14th army 
 bernolák army 
 belorussian front 
 3rd army 
 4th army 
 10th army 
 11th army 
 cavalry-mechanized group 
 ukrainian front 
 5th army 
 6th army 
 12th army



polish armies
 karpaty army 
 kraków army 
 lublin army (improvised) 
 łódź army 
 modlin army 
 pomorze army 
 poznań army 
 prusy army 
 warszawa army (improvised)

strength
germany:60 divisions,6 brigades,9,000 guns,[1]2,750 tanks,2,315 aircraft[2]slovakia:3 divisions
joined on 17 september:
soviet union:33+ divisions,11+ brigades,4,959 guns,4,736 tanks,3,300 aircraft


total:1,500,000 germans,[1] 466,516 soviets,[3]51,306 slovaksgrand total: 2,000,000+
poland:39 divisions 
(24 mobilised on september 1st),[4]16 brigades,[4]4,300 guns,[4]210 tanks,670 tankettes400 aircraft[1]


total: 1,000,000[note 1]casualties and losses
germany:[note 2]16,343 killed,3,500 missing,[11]30,300 wounded236 tanks destroyed246 aircraft destroyedslovakia:37 killed,11 missing,114 wounded[12]
soviet union:[note 3]1,475 killed or missing,2,383 wounded[3] or: 5,327 killed, missing and wounded[13]43 tanks destroyed


total casualties: 59,000
poland:[note 4]66,000 dead133,700 wounded660,000–690,000 captured132 tanks and armored cars destroyed327 aircraft destroyed859,700–889,700 total casualtiesvteinvasion of polandbattle of the border
chojnice
krojanty
lasy królewskie
mokra
pszczyna
grudziądz
mława
jordanów
fraustadt
węgierska górka
tuchola forest
częstochowa
mikołów
bukowiec
slovak invasion
baltic coast

westerplatte
danzig
danzig bay
worek plan
gdynia
hel
kępa oksywska
4–10 september

tomaszów mazowiecki
wizna
łódź
borowa góra
piotrków
różan
pułtusk
radom
łomża
barak
wola cyrusowa
northern front

warsaw
bzura
kałuszyn
węgrów
wilno
modlin
kobryń
brześć
2nd tomaszów lubelski
wólka węglowa
kampinos forest
krasnystaw
łomianki
krasnobród
kock
southern front

przemyśl
jarosław
1st tomaszów lubelski
jaworów
janów forest
cześniki
lwów
soviet invasion of poland

sarny
wilno
husynne
grodno
władypol
szack
wytyczno
parczew, jabłoń and milanów
vte soviet invasion of poland 
lwów (september 17–22)
wilno (september 18–19)
grodno (september 21–24)
szack (september 28)
parczew, jabłoń and milanów (september 29–30)
wytyczno (october 1)

vtecampaigns of world war iieurope
poland
phoney war
winter war
denmark & norway
france & benelux
britain
balkans
eastern front
finland
western front (1944–45)
pacific war

china
pacific ocean
south-east asia
south west pacific
japan
manchuria (1945)
mediterranean and middle east

north africa
horn of africa
mediterranean sea
adriatic
malta
yugoslavia
iraq
syria–lebanon
iran
italy
dodecanese
southern france
other campaigns

atlantic
arctic
strategic bombing
america
french west africa
madagascar
contemporaneous wars

soviet–japanese border conflicts
franco-thai war
ecuadorian–peruvian war
ili rebellion
the invasion of poland, known in poland as the september campaign (kampania wrześniowa) or the 1939 defensive war (wojna obronna 1939 roku), and in germany as the poland campaign (polenfeldzug), was an invasion of poland by germany that marked the beginning of world war ii. the german invasion began on 1 september 1939, one week after the signing of the molotov–ribbentrop pact between germany and the soviet union. the soviets invaded poland on 17 september following the molotov–tōgō agreement that terminated the soviet and japanese battles of khalkhin gol in the east on 16 september.[14] the campaign ended on 6 october with germany and the soviet union dividing and annexing the whole of poland under the terms of the german–soviet frontier treaty.
german forces invaded poland from the north, south, and west the morning after the gleiwitz incident. slovak forces advanced alongside the germans in northern slovakia. as the wehrmacht advanced, polish forces withdrew from their forward bases of operation close to the polish–german border to more established lines of defence to the east. after the mid-september polish defeat in the battle of the bzura, the germans gained an undisputed advantage. polish forces then withdrew to the southeast where they prepared for a long defence of the romanian bridgehead and awaited expected support and relief from france and the united kingdom.[15] while those two countries had pacts with poland and had declared war on germany on 3 september, in the end their aid to poland was very limited.
on 17 september, the soviet red army invaded eastern poland, the territory that fell into the soviet "sphere of influence" according to the secret protocol of the molotov–ribbentrop pact; this rendered the polish plan of defence obsolete.[16] facing a second front, the polish government concluded the defence of the romanian bridgehead was no longer feasible and ordered an emergency evacuation of all troops to neutral romania.[17] on 6 october, following the polish defeat at the battle of kock, german and soviet forces gained full control over poland. the success of the invasion marked the end of the second polish republic, though poland never formally surrendered.
on 8 october, after an initial period of military administration, germany directly annexed western poland and the former free city of danzig and placed the remaining block of territory under the administration of the newly established general government. the soviet union incorporated its newly acquired areas into its constituent belarusian and ukrainian republics, and immediately started a campaign of sovietization. in the aftermath of the invasion, a collective of underground resistance organizations formed the polish underground state within the territory of the former polish state. many of the military exiles that managed to escape poland subsequently joined the polish armed forces in the west, an armed force loyal to the polish government-in-exile.

contents

1 prelude

1.1 breakdown of talks


2 opposing forces

2.1 germany
2.2 poland


3 details of the campaign

3.1 german plan
3.2 polish defence plan
3.3 phase 1: german invasion
3.4 phase 2: after soviet union invasion from the east
3.5 civilian deaths


4 aftermath
5 eyewitness account
6 misconceptions

6.1 combat between polish cavalry and german tanks
6.2 polish air force
6.3 polish resistance to the invasion
6.4 first use of blitzkrieg strategy


7 see also
8 notes
9 references
10 sources
11 further reading
12 external links


prelude[edit]
main article: causes of world war ii
on 30 january 1933, the national socialist german workers' party, under its leader adolf hitler, came to power in germany.[18] while the weimar republic had long sought to annex territories belonging to poland, it was hitler's own idea and not a realization of weimar plans to invade and partition poland,[19] annex bohemia and austria, and create satellite or puppet states economically subordinate to germany.[20] as part of this long-term policy, hitler at first pursued a policy of rapprochement with poland, trying to improve opinion in germany, culminating in the german–polish non-aggression pact of 1934.[21] earlier, hitler's foreign policy worked to weaken ties between poland and france, and attempted to manoeuvre poland into the anti-comintern pact, forming a cooperative front against the soviet union.[21][22] poland would be granted territory to its northeast in ukraine and belarus if it agreed to wage war against the soviet union, but the concessions the poles were expected to make meant that their homeland would become largely dependent on germany, functioning as little more than a client state. the poles feared that their independence would eventually be threatened altogether;[22] historically hitler had already denounced the right of poland to independence in 1930, writing that poles and czechs are a “rabble not worth a penny more than the inhabitants of sudan or india. how can they demand the rights of independent states?”[23]
the population of the free city of danzig was strongly in favour of annexation by germany, as were many of the ethnic german inhabitants of the polish territory that separated the german exclave of east prussia from the rest of the reich.[24] the so-called polish corridor constituted land long disputed by poland and germany, and inhabited by a polish majority. the corridor had become a part of poland after the treaty of versailles. many germans also wanted the urban port city of danzig and its environs (comprising the free city of danzig) to be reincorporated into germany. danzig city had a german majority,[25] and had been separated from germany after versailles and made into the nominally independent free city. hitler sought to use this as casus belli, a reason for war, reverse the post-1918 territorial losses, and on many occasions had appealed to german nationalism, promising to "liberate" the german minority still in the corridor, as well as danzig.[26]

events leading to world war ii
treaty of versailles1919treaty of trianon1920treaty of rapallo1920franco-polish alliance1921march on rome1922corfu incident1923occupation of the ruhr 1923–1925mein kampf1925pacification of libya 1923–1932dawes plan 1924locarno treaties 1925chinese civil war 1927–1936young plan 1929great depression 1929–1941japanese invasion of manchuria1931pacification of manchukuo 1931–1942january 28 incident 1932world disarmament conference 1932–1934defense of the great wall 1933battle of rehe 1933tanggu truce 1933nazis rise to power in germany1933italo-soviet pact 1933inner mongolian campaign1933–1936german-polish non-aggression pact1934franco-soviet treaty of mutual assistance1935soviet–czechoslovakia treaty of mutual assistance1935anglo-german naval agreement1935second italo-ethiopian war1935–1936remilitarization of the rhineland1936spanish civil war1936–1939anti-comintern pact1936suiyuan campaign1936second sino-japanese war1937–1945uss panay incident 1937anschlussmar. 1938may crisis may 1938battle of lake khasanjuly–aug. 1938undeclared german-czechoslovak warsep. 1938munich agreement sep. 1938first vienna award nov. 1938german occupation of czechoslovakiamar. 1939german ultimatum to lithuaniamar. 1939slovak–hungarian warmar. 1939final offensive of the spanish civil warmar.–apr. 1939danzig crisismar.–aug. 1939british guarantee to polandmar. 1939italian invasion of albaniaapr. 1939soviet–british–french moscow negotiationsapr.–aug. 1939pact of steelmay 1939battles of khalkhin golmay–sep. 1939molotov–ribbentrop pactaug. 1939invasion of polandsep. 1939
vte
the invasion was referred to by germany as the 1939 defensive war since hitler proclaimed that poland had attacked germany and that "germans in poland are persecuted with a bloody terror and are driven from their homes. the series of border violations, which are unbearable to a great power, prove that the poles no longer are willing to respect the german frontier."[27]
poland participated with germany in the partition of czechoslovakia that followed the munich agreement, although they were not part of the agreement. it coerced czechoslovakia to surrender the region of český těšín by issuing an ultimatum to that effect on 30 september 1938, which was accepted by czechoslovakia on 1 october.[28] this region had a polish majority and had been disputed between czechoslovakia and poland in the aftermath of world war i.[29][30] the polish annexation of slovak territory (several villages in the regions of čadca, orava and spiš) later served as the justification for the slovak state to join the german invasion.
by 1937, germany began to increase its demands for danzig, while proposing that an extraterritorial roadway, part of the reichsautobahn system, be built in order to connect east prussia with germany proper, running through the polish corridor.[31] poland rejected this proposal, fearing that after accepting these demands, it would become increasingly subject to the will of germany and eventually lose its independence as the czechs had.[32] polish leaders also distrusted hitler.[32] the british were also wary of germany's increasing strength and assertiveness threatening its balance of power strategy.[33] on 31 march 1939, poland formed a military alliance with the united kingdom and france, believing that polish independence and territorial integrity would be defended with their support if it were to be threatened by germany.[34] on the other hand, british prime minister neville chamberlain and his foreign secretary, lord halifax, still hoped to strike a deal with hitler regarding danzig (and possibly the polish corridor). chamberlain and his supporters believed war could be avoided and hoped germany would agree to leave the rest of poland alone. german hegemony over central europe was also at stake. in private, hitler said in may that danzig was not the important issue to him, but pursuit of lebensraum for germany.[35]

breakdown of talks[edit]
with tensions mounting, germany turned to aggressive diplomacy. on 28 april 1939, hitler unilaterally withdrew from both the german-polish non-aggression pact of 1934 and the london naval agreement of 1935. talks over danzig and the corridor broke down and months passed without diplomatic interaction between germany and poland. during this interim period, the germans learned that france and britain had failed to secure an alliance with the soviet union against germany, and that the soviet union was interested in an alliance with germany against poland. hitler had already issued orders to prepare for a possible "solution of the polish problem by military means" through the case white scenario.
in may 1939, in a statement to his generals while they were in the midst of planning the invasion of poland, hitler made it clear that the invasion would not come without resistance as it had in czechoslovakia:[36]

.mw-parser-output .templatequote{overflow:hidden;margin:1em 0;padding:0 40px}.mw-parser-output .templatequote .templatequotecite{line-height:1.5em;text-align:left;padding-left:1.6em;margin-top:0}with minor exceptions german national unification has been achieved. further successes cannot be achieved without bloodshed. poland will always be on the side of our adversaries... danzig is not the objective. it is a matter of expanding our living space in the east, of making our food supply secure, and solving the problem of the baltic states. to provide sufficient food you must have sparsely settled areas. there is therefore no question of sparing poland, and the decision remains to attack poland at the first opportunity. we cannot expect a repetition of czechoslovakia. there will be fighting.[36]

 vyacheslav molotov signs the molotov–ribbentrop pact, a german–soviet non-aggression pact.
on august 22, just over a week before the onset of war, hitler delivered a speech to his military commanders at the obersalzberg:

the object of the war is … physically to destroy the enemy. that is why i have prepared, for the moment only in the east, my 'death's head' formations with orders to kill without pity or mercy all men, women, and children of polish descent or language. only in this way can we obtain the living space we need. [37]

with the surprise signing of the molotov–ribbentrop pact on 23 august, the result of secret nazi–soviet talks held in moscow, germany neutralized the possibility of soviet opposition to a campaign against poland and war became imminent. in fact, the soviets agreed not to aid france or the uk in the event of their going to war with germany over poland and, in a secret protocol of the pact, the germans and the soviets agreed to divide eastern europe, including poland, into two spheres of influence; the western one-third of the country was to go to germany and the eastern two-thirds to the soviet union.
the german assault was originally scheduled to begin at 04:00 on 26 august. however, on 25 august, the polish-british common defence pact was signed as an annex to the franco-polish military alliance. in this accord, britain committed itself to the defence of poland, guaranteeing to preserve polish independence. at the same time, the british and the poles were hinting to berlin that they were willing to resume discussions—not at all how hitler hoped to frame the conflict. thus, he wavered and postponed his attack until 1 september, managing to in effect halt the entire invasion "in mid-leap".

 planned and actual divisions of poland, according to the molotov–ribbentrop pact, with later adjustments
however, there was one exception: on the night of 25–26 august, a german sabotage group which had not heard anything about a delay of the invasion made an attack on the jablunkov pass and mosty railway station in silesia. on the morning of 26 august, this group was repelled by polish troops. the german side described all this as an incident "caused by an insane individual" (see jabłonków incident).
on 26 august, hitler tried to dissuade the british and the french from interfering in the upcoming conflict, even pledging that the wehrmacht forces would be made available to britain's empire in the future.[38][39] the negotiations convinced hitler that there was little chance the western allies would declare war on germany, and even if they did, because of the lack of "territorial guarantees" to poland, they would be willing to negotiate a compromise favourable to germany after its conquest of poland. meanwhile, the increased number of overflights by high-altitude reconnaissance aircraft and cross-border troop movements signaled that war was imminent.

 the map shows the beginning of world war ii in september 1939 in a european context.
on 29 august, prompted by the british, germany issued one last diplomatic offer, with fall weiss yet to be rescheduled. that evening, the german government responded in a communication that it aimed not only for the restoration of danzig but also the polish corridor (which had not previously been part of hitler's demands) in addition to the safeguarding of the german minority in poland. it said that they were willing to commence negotiations, but indicated that a polish representative with the power to sign an agreement had to arrive in berlin the next day while in the meantime it would draw up a set of proposals.[40] the british cabinet was pleased that negotiations had been agreed to but, mindful of how emil hácha had been forced to sign his country away under similar circumstances just months earlier, regarded the requirement for an immediate arrival of a polish representative with full signing powers as an unacceptable ultimatum.[41][42] on the night of 30/31 august, german foreign minister joachim von ribbentrop read a 16-point german proposal to the british ambassador. when the ambassador requested a copy of the proposals for transmission to the polish government, ribbentrop refused, on the grounds that the requested polish representative had failed to arrive by midnight.[43] when polish ambassador lipski went to see ribbentrop later on 31 august to indicate that poland was favorably disposed to negotiations, he announced that he did not have the full power to sign, and ribbentrop dismissed him. it was then broadcast that poland had rejected germany's offer, and negotiations with poland came to an end. hitler issued orders for the invasion to commence soon afterwards.
on 29 august, polish minister of foreign affairs, józef beck ordered mobilization, but under the pressure from great britain and france, the mobilization was cancelled. when the final mobilization started, it added to the confusion.[44]
on 30 august, the polish navy sent its destroyer flotilla to britain, executing the peking plan. on the same day, marshal of poland edward rydz-śmigły announced the mobilization of polish troops. however, he was pressured into revoking the order by the french, who apparently still hoped for a diplomatic settlement, failing to realize that the germans were fully mobilized and concentrated at the polish border.[45] during the night of 31 august, the gleiwitz incident, a false flag attack on the radio station, was staged near the border city of gleiwitz in upper silesia by german units posing as polish troops, as part of the wider operation himmler.[46] on 31 august 1939, hitler ordered hostilities against poland to start at 4:45 the next morning. because of the earlier stoppage, poland managed to mobilize only 70% of its planned forces, and many units were still forming or moving to their designated frontline positions.

opposing forces[edit]
see also: opposing forces in the polish september campaign, soviet order of battle for invasion of poland in 1939, and slovak invasion of poland
germany[edit]
see also: german order of battle for the invasion of poland
germany had a substantial numeric advantage over poland and had developed a significant military before the conflict. the heer (army) had 3,472 tanks in its inventory, of which 2,859 were with the field army and 408 with the replacement army.[47] 453 tanks were assigned into four light divisions, while another 225 tanks were in detached regiments and companies.[48]  most notably, the germans had seven panzer divisions, with 2,009 tanks between them, utilizing a new operational doctrine.[49] it held that these divisions should act in coordination with other elements of the military, punching holes in the enemy line and isolating selected units, which would be encircled and destroyed. this would be followed up by less-mobile mechanized infantry and foot soldiers. the luftwaffe (air force) provided both tactical and strategic air power, particularly dive bombers that disrupted lines of supply and communications. together, the new methods were nicknamed "blitzkrieg" (lightning war). while historian basil liddell hart claimed "poland was a full demonstration of the blitzkrieg theory",[50] some other historians disagree.[51]
aircraft played a major role in the campaign. bombers also attacked cities, causing huge losses amongst the civilian population through terror bombing and strafing. the luftwaffe forces consisted of 1,180 fighters, 290 ju 87 stuka dive bombers, 1,100 conventional bombers (mainly heinkel he 111s and dornier do 17s), and an assortment of 550 transport and 350 reconnaissance aircraft.[52][53] in total, germany had close to 4,000 aircraft, most of them modern. a force of 2,315 aircraft was assigned to weiss.[54] due to its earlier participation in the spanish civil war, the luftwaffe was probably the most experienced, best-trained and best-equipped air force in the world in 1939.[55]

poland[edit]
see also: polish army order of battle in 1939
 polish infantry
emerging in 1918 as an independent country after 123 years after the partitions of poland - the second polish republic, when compared with countries such as united kingdom or germany, was a relatively indigent and mostly agricultural country. the partitioning powers did not invest in the development of industry, especially in the armaments industry in ethnically polish areas. between 1936 and 1939, poland invested heavily in the newly created central industrial region. preparations for a defensive war with germany were ongoing for many years, but most plans assumed fighting would not begin before 1942. to raise funds for industrial development, poland sold much of the modern equipment it produced.[56] in 1936, a national defence fund was set up to collect funds necessary for strengthening the polish armed forces. the polish army had approximately a million soldiers,but not all were mobilized by 1 september. latecomers sustained significant casualties when public transport became targets of the luftwaffe. the polish military had fewer armored forces than the germans, and these units, dispersed within the infantry, were unable to effectively engage the germans.[57]
experiences in the polish-soviet war shaped polish army organizational and operational doctrine. unlike the trench warfare of world war i, the polish-soviet war was a conflict in which the cavalry's mobility played a decisive role.[58] poland acknowledged the benefits of mobility but was unable to invest heavily in many of the expensive, unproven inventions since then. in spite of this, polish cavalry brigades were used as a mobile mounted infantry and had some successes against both german infantry and cavalry.[59]

 polish pzl.37 łoś medium bombers with a four-man crew
the polish air force (lotnictwo wojskowe) was at a severe disadvantage against the german luftwaffe due to inferiority in numbers and obsolescence of its fighter planes. however, contrary to german propaganda, it was not destroyed on the ground—in fact it was successfully dispersed before the conflict started and not a single one of its combat planes was destroyed on the ground in the first days of the conflict.[60] the polish air force lacked modern fighters, vastly due to withdrawal of many advanced projects, such as for example pzl.38 wilk and delay in introduction of completely new modern polish multi-purpose fighter pzl.50 jastrząb. however its pilots were among the world's best trained, as proven a year later in the battle of britain, in which the poles played a major part.[61]
overall, the germans enjoyed numerical and qualitative aircraft superiority. poland had only about 600 aircraft, of which only pzl.37 łoś heavy bombers were modern and comparable to its german counterparts. the polish air force had roughly 185 pzl p.11 and some 95 pzl p.7 fighters, 175 pzl.23 karaś bs, 35 karaś as light bombers.[note 5] however, for the september campaign, not all of those aircraft were mobilized. by 1 september, out of over 100 heavy bombers pzl.37s produced only 36 pzl.37s were deployed, the rest being mostly in training units. all those aircraft were of indigenous polish design, with the bombers being more modern than fighters, according to the ludomił rayski air force expansion plan, which relied on a strong bomber force.  the polish air force consisted of a 'bomber brigade', 'pursuit brigade' and aircraft assigned to the various ground armies.[63] the polish fighters were older than their german counterparts; the pzl p.11 fighter—produced in the early 1930s—had a top speed of only 365 km/h (227 mph), far less than german bombers. to compensate, the pilots relied on its maneuverability and high diving speed.[64] the polish air force's decisions to strengthen its resources came too late, mostly due to budget limitations. as "last minute" order in the summer of 1939 poland bought 160 french morane-saulnier m.s.406 fighters and 111 english airplanes (100 light bombers fairey battle, 10 hurricanes and 1 supermarine_spitfire; sale of 150 spitfires asked by polish government was rejected by air ministry).[65] despite some of this airplanes had been shipped to poland before 1 september 1939, none of them would take part in combat.  polish air force in late 1938 ordered from pzl also 300 very modern polish light bombers—plane none of them were delivered before 1 september 1939.[66]

 polish 7tp light tanks in formation during the first days of the invasion
the tank force consisted of two armored brigades, four independent tank battalions and some 30 companies of tks tankettes attached to infantry divisions and cavalry brigades.[67] a standard tank of the polish army during the invasion of 1939 was the 7tp light tank. it was the first tank in the world to be equipped with a diesel engine and 360° gundlach periscope.[68] the 7tp was significantly better armed than its most common opponents, the german panzer i and ii, but only 140 tanks were produced between 1935 and the outbreak of the war. poland had also a few relatively modern imported designs, such as 50 renault r35 tanks and 38 vickers e tanks.
the polish navy was a small fleet of destroyers, submarines and smaller support vessels. most polish surface units followed operation peking, leaving polish ports on 20 august and escaping by way of the north sea to join with the british royal navy. submarine forces participated in operation worek, with the goal of engaging and damaging german shipping in the baltic sea, but they had much less success. in addition, many merchant marine ships joined the british merchant fleet and took part in wartime convoys.
average polish infantry division consisted of 16,492 soldiers and was equipped with 326 light and medium machine guns, 132 heavy machine guns, 92 anti-tank rifles and several dozen light, medium, heavy, anti-tank and anti-airplane field artillery. contrary to 1,009 cars and trucks and 4,842 horses in the average german infantry division—average polish infantry division had 76 cars and trucks and 6,939 horses.[69]

details of the campaign[edit]
german plan[edit]
this section needs additional citations for verification. please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed.find sources: "invasion of poland" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · jstor (august 2017) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
 dispositions of the opposing forces on 31 august 1939 with the german order of battle overlaid in pink.
the september campaign was devised by general franz halder, chief of the general staff, and directed by general walther von brauchitsch, the commander in chief of the upcoming campaign. it called for the start of hostilities before a declaration of war, and pursued a doctrine of mass encirclement and destruction of enemy forces. the infantry—far from completely mechanized but fitted with fast-moving artillery and logistic support—was to be supported by panzers and small numbers of truck-mounted infantry (the schützen regiments, forerunners of the panzergrenadiers) to assist the rapid movement of troops and concentrate on localized parts of the enemy front, eventually isolating segments of the enemy, surrounding, and destroying them. the pre-war "armored idea" (which an american journalist in 1939 dubbed blitzkrieg)—which was advocated by some generals, including heinz guderian—would have had the armor punching holes in the enemy's front and ranging deep into rear areas; in actuality, the campaign in poland would be fought along more traditional lines. this stemmed from conservatism on the part of the german high command, who mainly restricted the role of armor and mechanized forces to supporting the conventional infantry divisions.

 polish infantryman, 1939
poland's terrain was well suited for mobile operations when the weather cooperated; the country had flat plains with long frontiers totalling almost 5,600 km (3,500 mi), poland's long border with germany on the west and north—facing east prussia—extended 2,000 km (1,200 mi). those had been lengthened by another 300 km (190 mi) on the southern side in the aftermath of the munich agreement of 1938. the german incorporation of bohemia and moravia and creation of the german puppet state of slovakia meant that poland's southern flank was also exposed.
hitler demanded that poland be conquered in six weeks, but german planners thought that it would require three months.[70] they intended to fully exploit their long border with the great enveloping manoeuver of fall weiss. german units were to invade poland from three directions:

a main attack over the western polish border. this was to be carried out by army group south commanded by colonel general gerd von rundstedt, attacking from german silesia and from the moravian and slovak border: general johannes blaskowitz's 8th army was to drive eastward against łódź; general wilhelm list's 14th army was to push on toward kraków and to turn the poles' carpathian flank; and general walter von reichenau's 10th army, in the centre with army group south's armor, was to deliver the decisive blow with a northeastward thrust into the heart of poland.
a second route of attack from northern prussia. colonel general fedor von bock commanded army group north, comprising general georg von küchler's 3rd army, which was to strike southward from east prussia, and general günther von kluge's 4th army, which was to attack eastward across the base of the polish corridor.
a tertiary attack by part of army group south's allied slovak units from slovakia.
from within poland, the german minority would assist by engaging in diversion and sabotage operations through volksdeutscher selbstschutz units prepared before the war.
all three assaults were to converge on warsaw, while the main polish army was to be encircled and destroyed west of the vistula. fall weiss was initiated on 1 september 1939, and was the first operation of second world war in europe.

polish defence plan[edit]
 deployment of german, polish, and slovak divisions immediately before the german invasion.
the polish determination to deploy forces directly at the german-polish border, prompted by the polish-british common defence pact, shaped the country's defence plan, "plan west". poland's most valuable natural resources, industry and population were located along the western border in eastern upper silesia. polish policy centred on their protection especially since many politicians feared that if poland were to retreat from the regions disputed by germany, britain and france would sign a separate peace treaty with germany similar to the munich agreement of 1938.[71] the fact that none of poland's allies had specifically guaranteed polish borders or territorial integrity didn't help in easing polish concerns. for these reasons, the polish government disregarded french advice to deploy the bulk of its forces behind natural barriers such as the vistula and san rivers, even though some polish generals supported it as a better strategy. the west plan did permit the polish armies to retreat inside the country, but it was supposed to be a slow retreat behind prepared positions and was intended to give the armed forces time to complete its mobilization and execute a general counteroffensive with the support of the western allies.[72]

 a camouflaged polish p-11 fighter at a combat airfield
the polish general staff had not begun elaborating the "west" defence plan until 4 march 1939. it was assumed that the polish army, fighting in the initial phase of the war alone, would be compelled to defend the western regions of the country. the plan of operations took into account, first of all, the numerical and material superiority of the enemy and, consequently, assumed the defensive character of polish operations. the polish intentions were: defence of the western regions judged as indispensable for waging the war, taking advantage of the propitious conditions for counterattacks by reserve units, and avoidance of being smashed before the beginning of franco/british operations in western europe. the operational plan had not been elaborated in detail and concerned only the first stage of operations.[73]
the british and french estimated that poland would be able to defend itself for two to three months, while poland estimated it could do so for at least six months. while poland drafted its estimates based upon the expectation that the western allies would honor their treaty obligations and quickly start an offensive of their own, the french and british expected the war to develop into trench warfare much like world war i. the polish government was not notified of this strategy and based all of its defence plans on promises of quick relief by their western allies.[74][75]
polish forces were stretched thinly along the polish-german border and lacked compact defence lines and good defence positions along disadvantageous terrain. this strategy also left supply lines poorly protected. one-third of poland's forces were massed in or near the polish corridor, making them vulnerable to a double envelopment from east prussia and the west. another third were concentrated in the north-central part of the country, between the major cities of łódź and warsaw.[76] the forward positioning of polish forces vastly increased the difficulty of carrying out strategic maneuvers, compounded by inadequate mobility, as polish units often lacked the ability to retreat from their defensive positions as they were being overrun by more mobile german mechanized formations.[77]

 peking plan: polish destroyers evacuate the baltic sea en route to the united kingdom.
as the prospect of conflict increased, the british government pressed marshal edward rydz-śmigły to evacuate the most modern elements of the polish navy from the baltic sea.[78] in the event of war the polish military leaders realized that the ships which remained in the baltic were likely to be quickly sunk by the germans. furthermore, the danish straits were well within operating range of the german kriegsmarine and luftwaffe, so there was little chance of an evacuation plan succeeding if implemented after hostilities began. four days after the signing of the polish-british common defence pact, three destroyers of the polish navy executed the peking plan and consequently evacuated to great britain.[78]
although the polish military had prepared for conflict, the civilian population remained largely unprepared. polish pre-war propaganda emphasized that any german invasion would be easily repelled. consequently, polish defeats during the german invasion came as a shock to the civilian population.[77] lacking training for such a disaster, the civilian population panicked and retreated east, spreading chaos, lowering troop morale and making road transportation for polish troops very difficult.[77] the propaganda also had some negative consequences for the polish troops themselves, whose communications, disrupted by german mobile units operating in the rear and civilians blocking roads, were further thrown into chaos by bizarre reports from polish radio stations and newspapers, which often reported imaginary victories and other military operations. this led to some polish troops being encircled or taking a stand against overwhelming odds, when they thought they were actually counterattacking or would soon receive reinforcements from other victorious areas.[77]

phase 1: german invasion[edit]
 map showing the advances made by the germans, and the disposition of all troops from 1 to 14 september
following several german-staged incidents (like the gleiwitz incident, a part of operation himmler), which german propaganda used as a pretext to claim that german forces were acting in self-defence, the first regular act of war took place on 1 september 1939. at 04:45, the old german pre-dreadnought battleship schleswig-holstein opened fire on the polish military transit depot at westerplatte in the free city of danzig on the baltic sea. however, in many places german units crossed the polish border even before 04.45 and the luftwaffe attack on wieluń started around 04.40.[79][80] at 08:00, german troops—still without a formal declaration of war issued—attacked near the polish village of mokra. the battle of the border had begun. later that day, the germans attacked on poland's western, southern and northern borders, while german aircraft began raids on polish cities. the main axis of attack led eastwards from germany through the western polish border. supporting attacks came from east prussia in the north, and a joint german-slovak tertiary attack by units (field army "bernolák") from the german-allied slovak republic in the south. all three assaults converged on the polish capital of warsaw.

 the city of wieluń destroyed by luftwaffe bombing
france and the uk declared war on germany on 3 september, but failed to provide any meaningful support. the german-french border saw only a few minor skirmishes, although the majority of german forces, including 85% of their armoured forces, were engaged in poland. despite some polish successes in minor border battles, german technical, operational and numerical superiority forced the polish armies to retreat from the borders towards warsaw and lwów. the luftwaffe gained air superiority early in the campaign. by destroying communications, the luftwaffe increased the pace of the advance which overran polish airstrips and early warning sites, causing logistical problems for the poles. many polish air force units ran low on supplies, 98 of their number withdrew into then-neutral romania.[81] the polish initial strength of 400 was reduced to 54 by 14 september and air opposition virtually ceased,[81] with the main polish air bases destroyed in the first 48 hours of the war.[82]

 hitler watching german soldiers marching into poland in september 1939.
germany attacked from three directions on land. günther von kluge led 20 divisions that entered the polish corridor, and met a second force heading to warsaw from east prussia. gerd von rundstedt's 35 divisions attacked southern poland.[82] by 3 september, when von kluge in the north had reached the vistula river (some 10 km (6.2 mi) from the german border at that time) and georg von küchler was approaching the narew river, walther von reichenau's armor was already beyond the warta river; two days later, his left wing was well to the rear of łódź and his right wing at the town of kielce. on 7 september the defenders of warsaw had fallen back to a 48 km (30 mi) line paralleling the vistula river, where they rallied against german tank thrusts. the defensive line ran between płońsk and pułtusk, northwest and northeast of warsaw, respectively. the right wing of the poles had been hammered back from ciechanów about 40 km (25 mi) northwest of pułtusk pivoting on płońsk. at one stage in the struggle the poles were driven from pułtusk and the germans threatened to turn the polish flank and thrust on to the vistula and warsaw. pułtusk, however, was regained in the face of withering german fire. many german tanks were captured after a german attack pierced the line but the polish defenders outflanked them.[83] by 8 september, one of reichenau's armored corps—having advanced 225 km (140 mi) in the first week of the campaign—reached the outskirts of warsaw. light divisions on reichenau's right were on the vistula between warsaw and the town of sandomierz by 9 september while list—in the south—was on the san river north and south of the town of przemyśl. at the same time, guderian led his 3rd army tanks across the narew, attacking the line of the bug river, already encircling warsaw. all the german armies made progress in fulfilling their parts of the fall weiss plan. the polish armies were splitting up into uncoordinated fragments, some of which were retreating while others were launching disjointed attacks on the nearest german columns.

 cheerful german and slovak soldiers posing with a group of civilians in komańcza, september 1939.
polish forces abandoned the regions of pomerelia (the polish corridor), greater poland and polish upper silesia in the first week. the polish plan for border defence was proven a dismal failure. the german advance as a whole was not slowed. on 10 september, the polish commander-in-chief—marshal edward rydz-śmigły—ordered a general retreat to the southeast, towards the so-called romanian bridgehead.[84] meanwhile, the germans were tightening their encirclement of the polish forces west of the vistula (in the łódź area and, still farther west, around poznań) and also penetrating deeply into eastern poland. warsaw—under heavy aerial bombardment since the first hours of the war—was attacked on 9 september and was put under siege on 13 september. around that time, advanced german forces also reached the city of lwów, a major metropolis in eastern poland. 1,150 german aircraft bombed warsaw on 24 september.

 a bombed polish army column during the battle of the bzura
the polish defensive plan called for a strategy of encirclement: they were to allow the germans to advance in between two polish army groups in the line between berlin and warsaw-lodz, at which point armia prusy would move in and repulse the german spearhead, trapping them. in order for this to happen, armia prusy needed to be fully mobilized by 3 september. however, polish military planners failed to foresee the speed of the german advance and assumed that armia prusy would need to be fully mobilized by 16 september.[85]
the largest battle during this campaign—the battle of bzura—took place near the bzura river west of warsaw and lasted 9–19 september. polish armies poznań and pomorze, retreating from the border area of the polish corridor, attacked the flank of the advancing german 8th army, but the counterattack failed after initial success. after the defeat, poland lost its ability to take the initiative and counterattack on a large scale. german air power was instrumental during the battle. the luftwaffe's offensive broke what remained of polish resistance in an "awesome demonstration of air power".[86] the luftwaffe quickly destroyed the bridges across the bzura river. afterward, the polish forces were trapped out in the open, and were attacked by wave after wave of stukas, dropping 50 kg (110 lb) "light bombs" which caused huge numbers of casualties. the polish anti-aircraft batteries ran out of ammunition and retreated to the forests, but were then "smoked out" by the heinkel he 111 and dornier do 17s dropping 100 kg (220 lb) incendiaries. the luftwaffe left the army with the task of mopping up survivors. the stukageschwaders alone dropped 388 t (428 short tons) of bombs during this battle.[86]
by 12 september all of poland west of the vistula was conquered, except for isolated warsaw.[82] the polish government (of president ignacy mościcki) and the high command (of marshal edward rydz-śmigły) left warsaw in the first days of the campaign and headed southeast, reaching lublin on 6 september. from there, it moved on 9 september to kremenez, and on 13 september to zaleshiki on the romanian border.[87] rydz-śmigły ordered the polish forces to retreat in the same direction, behind the vistula and san rivers, beginning the preparations for the defence of the romanian bridgehead area.[84]

phase 2: after soviet union invasion from the east[edit]
further information: soviet invasion of poland
 disposition of all troops following the soviet invasion.
from the beginning, the german government repeatedly asked vyacheslav molotov whether the soviet union would keep to its side of the partition bargain.[88][89] the soviet forces were holding fast along their designated invasion points pending finalization of the five-month-long undeclared war with japan in the far east. on 15 september 1939, the ambassadors molotov and shigenori tōgō completed their agreement ending the conflict, and the nomonhan cease-fire went into effect on 16 september 1939. now cleared of any "second front" threat from the japanese, soviet premier joseph stalin ordered his forces into poland on 17 september.[14] it was agreed that the ussr would relinquish its interest in the territories between the new border and warsaw in exchange for inclusion of lithuania in the soviet "zone of interest".
by 17 september, the polish defence was already broken and the only hope was to retreat and reorganize along the romanian bridgehead. however, these plans were rendered obsolete nearly overnight, when the over 800,000-strong soviet red army entered and created the belarusian and ukrainian fronts after invading the eastern regions of poland in violation of the riga peace treaty, the soviet-polish non-aggression pact, and other international treaties, both bilateral and multilateral.[note 6] soviet diplomacy had lied that they were "protecting the ukrainian and belarusian minorities of eastern poland since the polish government had abandoned the country and the polish state ceased to exist".[91]
polish border defence forces in the east—known as the korpus ochrony pogranicza—consisted of about 25 battalions. edward rydz-śmigły ordered them to fall back and not engage the soviets.[84] this, however, did not prevent some clashes and small battles, such as the battle of grodno, as soldiers and local population attempted to defend the city. the soviets executed  numerous polish officers, including prisoners of war like general józef olszyna-wilczyński.[92][93] the organization of ukrainian nationalists rose against the poles, and communist partisans organized local revolts, robbing and killing civilians.[94] those movements were quickly disciplined by the nkvd. the soviet invasion was one of the decisive factors that convinced the polish government that the war in poland was lost.[95] before the soviet attack from the east, the polish military's fall-back plan had called for long-term defence against germany in the south-eastern part of poland, while awaiting relief from a western allies attack on germany's western border.[95] however, the polish government refused to surrender or negotiate a peace with germany. instead, it ordered all units to evacuate poland and reorganize in france.

 red army enters the provincial capital of wilno during the soviet invasion, 19 september 1939
meanwhile, polish forces tried to move towards the romanian bridgehead area, still actively resisting the german invasion. from 17–20 september, polish armies kraków and lublin were crippled at the battle of tomaszów lubelski, the second-largest battle of the campaign. the city of lwów capitulated on 22 september because of soviet intervention; the city had been attacked by the germans over a week earlier, and in the middle of the siege, the german troops handed operations over to their soviet allies.[96] despite a series of intensifying german attacks, warsaw—defended by quickly reorganized retreating units, civilian volunteers and militia—held out until 28 september. the modlin fortress north of warsaw capitulated on 29 september after an intense 16-day battle. some isolated polish garrisons managed to hold their positions long after being surrounded by german forces. westerplatte enclave's tiny garrison capitulated on 7 september and the oksywie garrison held until 19 september; hel fortified area was defended until 2 october.[97] in the last week of september, hitler made a speech in the city of danzig in which he said:

meantime, russia felt moved, on its part, to march in for the protection of the interests of the white russian and ukrainian people in poland. we realize now that in england and france this german and russian co-operation is considered a terrible crime. an englishman even wrote that it is perfidious – well, the english ought to know. i believe england thinks this co-operation perfidious because the co-operation of democratic england with bolshevist russia failed, while national socialist germany's attempt with soviet russia succeeded.
poland never will rise again in the form of the versailles treaty. that is guaranteed not only by germany, but also guaranteed by russia. — adolf hitler, 19 september 1939[98]


despite a polish victory at the battle of szack, after which the soviets executed all the officers and ncos they had captured, the red army reached the line of rivers narew, bug river, vistula and san by 28 september, in many cases meeting german units advancing from the other direction. polish defenders on the hel peninsula on the shore of the baltic sea held out until 2 october. the last operational unit of the polish army, general franciszek kleeberg's samodzielna grupa operacyjna "polesie", surrendered after the four-day battle of kock near lublin on 6 october marking the end of the september campaign.[99]

civilian deaths[edit]
 a girl cries over the body of her 14-year-old sister who was strafed by the luftwaffe
hundreds of thousands of polish civilians were killed during the september invasion of poland and millions more were killed in the following years of german and soviet occupation. the polish campaign was the first action by adolf hitler in his attempt to create lebensraum (living space) for germans.  nazi propaganda was one of the factors behind the german brutality directed at civilians which had worked relentlessly to convince the german people into believing that the jews and slavs were untermenschen (subhumans).[100][101]
starting from the first day of invasion, the german air force (the luftwaffe) attacked civilian targets and columns of refugees along the roads to terrorize the polish people, disrupt communications, and target polish morale. the luftwaffe killed 6,000–7,000 polish civilians during the bombing of warsaw.[102]
the german invasion saw atrocities committed against polish men, women, and children.[103] the german forces (both ss and the regular wehrmacht) murdered tens of thousands of polish civilians (e.g. the leibstandarte ss adolf hitler was notorious throughout the campaign for burning villages[104] and committing atrocities in numerous polish towns, including massacres in błonie, złoczew, bolesławiec, torzeniec, goworowo, mława, and włocławek).[105]
during operation tannenberg, an ethnic cleansing campaign organized by multiple elements of the german government, tens of thousands of polish civilians were shot at 760 mass execution sites by the einsatzgruppen.
altogether, the civilian losses of polish population amounted to about 150,000–200,000.[106] roughly 1,250 german civilians were also killed during the invasion. (an additional 2,000 died fighting polish troops as members of ethnic german militia forces such as the volksdeutscher selbstschutz, which constituted a fifth column during the invasion.)[107]

aftermath[edit]
john gunther wrote in december 1939 that "the german campaign was a masterpiece. nothing quite like it has been seen in military history." despite poland's poor leadership and outside assistance, gunther still claimed that the invasion proved the skill of the german armed forces.[82] the country was divided between germany and the soviet union. slovakia gained back those territories taken by poland in autumn 1938. lithuania received the city of vilnius and its environs on 28 october 1939 from the soviet union. on 8 and 13 september 1939, the german military districts of "posen" (poznan)—commanded by general alfred von vollard-bockelberg [de]—and "westpreußen" (west prussia)—commanded by general walter heitz—were established in conquered greater poland and pomerelia, respectively.[108] based on laws of 21 may 1935 and 1 june 1938, the german wehrmacht delegated civil administrative powers to "chiefs of civil administration" (chefs der zivilverwaltung, cdz).[109] german dictator adolf hitler appointed arthur greiser to become the cdz of the posen military district, and danzig's gauleiter albert forster to become the cdz of the west prussian military district.[108] on 3 october, the military districts lodz and krakau (kraków) were set up under command of generalobersten (colonel-generals) gerd von rundstedt and wilhelm list, and hitler appointed hans frank and arthur seyss-inquart as civil heads, respectively.[108] at the same time, frank was appointed "supreme chief administrator" for all occupied territories.[108] on 28 september, another secret german-soviet protocol modified the arrangements of august: all of lithuania was shifted to the soviet sphere of influence; in exchange, the dividing line in poland was moved in germany's favour, eastwards towards the bug river. on 8 october, germany formally annexed the western parts of poland with greiser and forster as reichsstatthalter, while the south-central parts were administered as the  general government led by frank.

 german and soviet troops shaking hands following the invasion
even though water barriers separated most of the spheres of interest, the soviet and german troops met on numerous occasions. the most remarkable event of this kind occurred at brest-litovsk on 22 september. the german 19th panzer corps—commanded by general heinz guderian—had occupied the city, which lay within the soviet sphere of interest. when the soviet 29th tank brigade (commanded by semyon krivoshein) approached, the commanders agreed that the german troops would withdraw and the soviet troops would enter the city, saluting each other.[110] at brest-litovsk, soviet and german commanders held a joint victory parade before german forces withdrew westward behind a new demarcation line.[16][111] just three days earlier, however, the parties had a more hostile encounter near lwow (lviv, lemberg), when the german 137th gebirgsjägerregimenter (mountain infantry regiment) attacked a reconnaissance detachment of the soviet 24th tank brigade; after a few casualties on both sides, the parties turned to negotiations. the german troops left the area, and the red army troops entered lviv on 22 september.
the molotov–ribbentrop pact and the invasion of poland marked the beginning of a period during which the government of the soviet union increasingly tried to convince itself that the actions of germany were reasonable, and were not developments to be worried about, despite evidence to the contrary.[112] on 7 september 1939, just a few days after france and britain joined the war against germany, stalin explained to a colleague that the war was to the advantage of the soviet union, as follows:[113]

a war is on between two groups of capitalist countries ... for the redivision of the world, for the domination of the world! we see nothing wrong in their having a good hard fight and weakening each other ... hitler, without understanding it or desiring it, is shaking and undermining the capitalist system ... we can manoeuvre, pit one side against the other to set them fighting with each other as fiercely as possible ... the annihilation of poland would mean one fewer bourgeois fascist state to contend with! what would be the harm if as a result of the rout of poland we were to extend the socialist system onto new territories and populations?[113]

 polish troops withdrawn to hungary in september 1939
about 65,000 polish troops were killed in the fighting, with 420,000 others being captured by the germans and 240,000 more by the soviets (for a total of 660,000 prisoners). up to 120,000 polish troops escaped to neutral romania (through the romanian bridgehead and hungary), and another 20,000 to latvia and lithuania, with the majority eventually making their way to france or britain. most of the polish navy succeeded in evacuating to britain as well. german personnel losses were less than their enemies (c. 16,000 killed).

 german soldiers removing polish government insignia
none of the parties to the conflict—germany, the western allies or the soviet union—expected that the german invasion of poland would lead to a war that would surpass world war i in its scale and cost. it would be months before hitler would see the futility of his peace negotiation attempts with the united kingdom and france, but the culmination of combined european and pacific conflicts would result in what was truly a "world war". thus, what was not seen by most politicians and generals in 1939 is clear from the historical perspective: the polish september campaign marked the beginning of a pan-european war, which combined with the japanese invasion of china in 1937 and the pacific war in 1941 to form the global conflict known as world war ii.
the invasion of poland led britain and france to declare war on germany on 3 september. however, they did little to affect the outcome of the september campaign. no declaration of war was issued by britain and france against the soviet union. this lack of direct help led many poles to believe that they had been betrayed by their western allies.
on 23 may 1939, hitler explained to his officers that the object of the aggression was not danzig, but the need to obtain german lebensraum and details of this concept would be later formulated in the infamous generalplan ost.[114][115] the invasion decimated urban residential areas, civilians soon became indistinguishable from combatants, and the forthcoming german occupation (both on the annexed territories and in the general government) was one of the most brutal episodes of world war ii, resulting in between 5.47 million and 5.67 million polish deaths[116] (about 20% of the country's total population, and over 90% of its jewish minority)—including the mass murder of 3 million polish citizens (mainly jews as part of the final solution) in extermination camps like auschwitz, in concentration camps, and in numerous ad hoc massacres, where civilians were rounded up, taken to a nearby forest, machine-gunned, and then buried, whether they were dead or not.[citation needed]
according to the polish institute of national remembrance, soviet occupation between 1939 and 1941 resulted in the death of 150,000 and deportation of 320,000 of polish citizens,[116][117] when all who were deemed dangerous to the soviet regime were subject to sovietization, forced resettlement, imprisonment in labor camps (the gulags) or murdered, like the polish officers in the katyn massacre.[a]
since october 1939, the polish army that could escape imprisonment from the soviets or nazis were mainly heading for british and french territories. these places were considered safe, because of the pre-war alliance between great-britain, france and poland. not only did the government escape, but also the national gold supply was evacuated via romania and brought to the west, notably london and ottawa.[118][119] the approximately 75 tonnes (83 short tons) of gold was considered sufficient to field an army for the duration of the war.[120]

eyewitness account[edit]
from lemberg to bordeaux ('von lemberg bis bordeaux'), written by leo leixner, a journalist and war correspondent, is a first-hand account of the battles that led to the fall of poland, the low countries, and france. it includes a rare eyewitness description of the battle of węgierska górka. in august 1939, leixner joined the wehrmacht as a war reporter, was promoted to sergeant, and in 1941 published his recollections. the book was originally issued by franz eher nachfolger, the central publishing house of the nazi party.[121]

misconceptions[edit]
 german cavalry and motorized units entering poland from east prussia during 1939.
there are several common misconceptions regarding the polish september campaign.

combat between polish cavalry and german tanks[edit]
the polish army did not fight german tanks with horse-mounted cavalry wielding lances and swords. in 1939, only 10% of the polish army was made up of cavalry units.[122] polish cavalry never charged german tanks or entrenched infantry or artillery, but usually acted as mobile infantry (like dragoons) and reconnaissance units, and executed cavalry charges only in rare situations against foot soldiers. other armies (including german and soviet) also fielded and extensively used elite horse cavalry units at that time. polish cavalry consisted of 11 brigades, equipped with "ur" anti-tank rifles and light artillery such as the highly effective bofors 37 mm anti-tank gun. the myth originated from war correspondents' reports similar to that of the battle of krojanty, where a polish cavalry brigade was fired upon in ambush by hidden armored vehicles, after it had mounted a successful sabre-charge against german infantry. there were also been cases when polish cavalry dashing between tanks trying to break out of encirclement gave an impression of an attack.[note 7][123]

polish air force[edit]
the polish air force was not destroyed on the ground in the first days of the war. though numerically inferior, it had been redeployed from major air bases to small camouflaged airfields shortly before the war. only some trainers and auxiliary aircraft were destroyed on the ground. the polish air force, despite being significantly outnumbered and with its fighters outmatched by more advanced german fighters, remained active until the second week of the campaign, inflicting significant damage on the luftwaffe.[124] the luftwaffe lost 285 aircraft to all operational causes, with 279 more damaged, and the poles lost 333 aircraft.[125]

polish resistance to the invasion[edit]
another question concerns whether poland inflicted any significant losses on the german forces and whether it surrendered too quickly. in the first few days, germany sustained very heavy losses: poland cost the germans 993 tanks and armored vehicles as campaign losses of which 300 tanks were never recovered,[126][127] thousands of soldiers, and 25% of its air strength.[128] as for duration, the september campaign lasted about a week and a half less than the battle of france in 1940 even though the anglo-french forces were much closer to parity with the germans in numerical strength and equipment and were supported by the maginot line.[note 8] furthermore, the polish army was preparing the romanian bridgehead, which would have prolonged polish defence, but the plan was invalidated by the soviet invasion of poland on 17 september 1939.[129] poland also never officially surrendered to the germans. under german occupation, there was continued resistance by forces such as the armia krajowa, henryk dobrzański's guerillas, and the leśni ("forest partisans").

 polish soldiers with anti-aircraft artillery near the warsaw central station in the first days of september 1939.
first use of blitzkrieg strategy[edit]
it is often assumed that  blitzkrieg is the strategy that germany first used in poland. the ideas of blitzkrieg and mobile warfare had already been used in spain, china and siberia. many early post-war histories, such as barrie pitt's in the second world war (bpc publishing 1966), attribute german victory to "enormous development in military technique which occurred between 1918 and 1940", and cite that "germany, who translated (british inter-war) theories into action... called the result blitzkrieg". that idea has been repudiated by some authors. matthew cooper writes:

throughout the polish campaign, the employment of the mechanized units revealed the idea that they were intended solely to ease the advance and to support the activities of the infantry.... thus, any strategic exploitation of the armoured idea was still-born. the paralysis of command and the breakdown of morale were not made the ultimate aim of the ... german ground and air forces, and were only incidental by-products of the traditional manoeuvers of rapid encirclement and of the supporting activities of the flying artillery of the luftwaffe, both of which had as their purpose the physical destruction of the enemy troops. such was the vernichtungsgedanke of the polish campaign. — cooper[130]

vernichtungsgedanke was a strategy dating back to frederick the great, and it was applied in the polish campaign, little changed from the french campaigns in 1870 or 1914. the use of tanks

...left much to be desired.… fear of enemy action against the flanks of the advance, fear which was to prove so disastrous to german prospects in the west in 1940 and in the soviet union in 1941, was present from the beginning of the war. — cooper[51]

john ellis, writing in brute force, asserted that

...there is considerable justice in matthew cooper's assertion that the panzer divisions were not given the kind of strategic mission that was to characterize authentic armoured blitzkrieg, and were almost always closely subordinated to the various mass infantry armies. — ellis[131] (emphasis in original)

zaloga and madej, in the polish campaign 1939, also address the subject of mythical interpretations of blitzkrieg and the importance of other arms in the campaign. western accounts of the september campaign have stressed the shock value of the panzers and stuka attacks, they have

...tended to underestimate the punishing effect of german artillery on polish units. mobile and available in significant quantity, artillery shattered as many units as any other branch of the wehrmacht. — zaloga and madej[132]

see also[edit]
eastern front (world war ii)
polish resistance movement in world war ii
history of poland (1939–1945)
horses in world war ii
list of polish divisions in world war ii
occupation of poland (1939–1945)
oder-neisse line
phoney war
polish cavalry brigade order of battle in 1939
polish contribution to world war ii
siege of warsaw (1939)
timeline of the invasion of poland
war crimes of the wehrmacht
western betrayal
notes[edit]


^ various sources contradict each other so the figures quoted above should only be taken as a rough indication of the strength estimate. the most common range differences and their brackets are: german personnel 1,490,900 (official figure of the polish ministry of foreign affairs)—or 1,800,000. polish tanks: 100–880, 100 is the number of modern tanks, while the 880 number includes older tanks from the world war i era and tankettes.[5][6]

^ the discrepancy in german casualties can be attributed to the fact that some german statistics still listed soldiers as missing decades after the war. today the most common and accepted numbers are: 8,082 to 16,343 kia, 320 to 5,029 mia, 27,280 to 34,136 wia.[7] for comparison, in his 1939 speech following the polish campaign adolf hitler presented these german figures: 10,576 kia, 30,222 wia, and 3,400 mia.[8] according to early allied estimates, including those of the polish government-in-exile, the number of german kia casualties was 90,000 and wia casualties was 200,000[8][9]

equipment losses are given as 832 german tanks[10] of with approximately 236[10] to 341 as irrecoverable losses and approximately 319 other armored vehicles as irrecoverable losses (including 165 panzerspähwagen – of them 101 as irrecoverable losses)[10] 522–561 german planes (including 246–285 destroyed and 276 damaged), 1 german minelayer (m-85) and 1 german torpedo ship ("tiger")

^ soviet official losses – figures provided by krivosheev – are currently estimated at 1,475 kia or mia presumed dead (ukrainian front – 972, belorussian front – 503), and 2,383 wia (ukrainian front – 1,741, belorussian front – 642). the soviets lost approximately 150 tanks in combat of which 43 as irrecoverable losses, while hundreds more suffered technical failures.[3] however, russian historian igor bunich estimates soviet manpower losses at 5,327 kia or mia without a trace and wia.[13]

^ various sources contradict each other so the figures quoted above should only be taken as a rough indication of losses. the most common range brackets for casualties are: poland: 63,000 to 66,300 kia, 134,000 wia.[7] the often cited figure of 420,000 polish prisoners of war represents only those captured by the germans, as soviets captured about 250,000 polish pows themselves, making the total number of polish pows about 660,000–690,000. in terms of equipment the polish navy lost 1 destroyer (orp wicher), 1 minelayer (orp gryf) and several support craft. equipment loses included 132 polish tanks and armored cars 327 polish planes (118 fighters)[10]

^ p-11c (+43 reserve), 30 p-7 (+85 reserve), 118 p-23 karaś light bombers, 36 p-37 łoś bombers (armed in line, additionally a few of the total number produced were used in combat), 84 reconnaissance rxiii lublin, rwd14 czapla (+115 reserve)[62]

^ other treaties violated by the soviet union were: the 1919 covenant of the league of nations (to which the ussr adhered in 1934), the briand-kellogg pact of 1928 and the 1933 london convention on the definition of aggression.[90]

^ seidner takes issue here with this contention on at least one occasion. seidner, marshal edward śmigły-rydz rydz and the defence of poland

^ polish to german forces in the september campaign: 1,000,000 soldiers, 4,300 guns, 880 tanks, 435 aircraft (poland) to 1,800,000 soldiers, 10,000 guns, 2,800 tanks, 3,000 aircraft (germany). french and participating allies to german forces in the battle of france: 2,862,000 soldiers, 13,974 guns, 3,384 tanks, 3,099 aircraft 2 (allies) to 3,350,000 soldiers, 7,378 guns, 2,445 tanks, 5,446 aircraft (germany).


references[edit]



^ a b c ministry of foreign affairs. the 1939 campaign archived 11 december 2013 at the wayback machine polish ministry of foreign affairs, 2005.

^ er hooton, p. 85

^ a b c кривошеев г. ф., россия и ссср в войнах xx века: потери вооруженных сил. статистическое исследование (krivosheev g.f., russia and the ussr in the wars of the 20th century: losses of the armed forces. a statistical study greenhill 1997 .mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/65/lock-green.svg/9px-lock-green.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d6/lock-gray-alt-2.svg/9px-lock-gray-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/aa/lock-red-alt-2.svg/9px-lock-red-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration{color:#555}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration span{border-bottom:1px dotted;cursor:help}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/wikisource-logo.svg/12px-wikisource-logo.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output code.cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:inherit;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#33aa33;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-right{padding-right:0.2em}isbn 1-85367-280-7) (in russian)

^ a b c (in russian) переслегин. вторая мировая: война между реальностями.— м.:яуза, эксмо, 2006, с.22; р. э. дюпюи, т. н. дюпюи. всемирная история войн.—с-п,м: аст, кн.4, с.93.

^ internetowa encyklopedia pwn, article on 'kampania wrześniowa 1939'

^ website of the polish ministry of foreign affairs – the poles on the front lines

^ a b wojna obronna polski 1939, p. 851

^ a b "polish war, german losses". the canberra times. 13 october 1939. retrieved 17 january 2009.

^ "nazi loss in poland placed at 290,000". the new york times. 1941. archived from the original on 7 february 2009. retrieved 16 january 2009.

^ a b c d kamil cywinski, waffen und geheimwaffen des deutschen heeres 1933–1945

^ the encyclopedia of modern war by roger parkinson taylor & francis, isbn 0-8128-1898-9. p. 133.

^ "axis slovakia: hitler's slavic wedge, 1938–1945", page 81

^ a b bunich, igor (1994). operatsiia groza, ili, oshibka v tretem znake: istoricheskaia khronika. vita-oblik. p. 88. isbn 978-5-85976-003-9.

^ a b goldman pp. 163, 164

^ dariusz baliszewski (19 september 2004), most honoru. tygodnik wprost (weekly), 38/2004. issn 0209-1747.

^ a b kitchen, martin (1990). a world in flames: a short history of the second world war. longman. p. 74. isbn 978-0-582-03408-2. retrieved 2 november 2011.

^ sanford 2005, pp. 20–24.

^ "the nazification of germany". university of south florida. 2005.

^ kimmich, christoph m. (1 january 1969). "the weimar republic and the german-polish borders". the polish review. 14 (4): 37–45. jstor 25776872.

^ majer, diemut (2003). "non-germans" under the third reich: the nazi judicial and administrative system in germany and occupied eastern europe with special regard to occupied poland, 1939–1945. jhu press. pp. 188–89. isbn 978-0-8018-6493-3.

^ a b rothwell, victor (2001). origins of the second world war. manchester university press. p. 92. isbn 978-0-7190-5958-2.

^ a b crozier, andrew j. (1997). the causes of the second world war. wiley-blackwell. pp. 150–51. isbn 978-0-631-18601-4.

^ a ridiculous hundred million slavs : concerning adolf hitler's world-view, tadeusz manteuffel institute of history polish academy of sciences, jerzy wojciech borejsza p. 49, warsaw 2017

^ the second world war: volume 2 europe 1939–1943, tom 2 robin havers p. 25

^ "ergebnisse der volks- und berufszählung vom 1. november 1923 in der freien stadt danzig mit einem anhang: die ergebnisse der volkszählung vom 31. august 1924". verlag des statistischen landesamtes der freien stadt danzig. 1926.

^ snyder, louis leo; montgomery, john d (2003). the new nationalism. transaction publishers. p. 88. isbn 978-0-7658-0550-8.

^ "german army attacks poland; citiesbombed, port blockaded; danzig is acceptedinto reich". www.nytimes.com. the new york times. retrieved 26 april 2016.

^ nowa encyklopedia powszechna pwn 1997, vol. vi, 981.

^ zahradnik "korzenie zaolzia. warszawa – praga – trzyniec", 16–17.

^ gawrecká "československé slezsko. mezi světovými válkami 1918-1938", opava 2004, 21.

^ "elbing-königsberg autobahn". euronet.nl. archived from the original on 27 september 2007. retrieved 11 january 2009.

^ a b "the avalon project: documents in law, history and diplomacy". yale. retrieved 11 january 2009.

^ "world history in context – document".

^ indiana university. "chronology 1939". league of nations archives, palais des nations. geneva: indiana.edu.

^ a world at total war: global conflict and the politics of destruction, 1937–1945, roger chickering, stig förster, bernd greiner, p. 97

^ a b clark, lloyd, kursk: the greatest battle: eastern front 1943, 2011, p. 26

^ piotrowski 1998, p. 115.

^ "home – fdr presidential library & museum".

^ "home – fdr presidential library & museum".

^ reply of the german chancellor to the communication of 28 august 1939, from his majesty's government cited in the british blue book

^ viscount halifax to sir n. henderson (berlin) cited in the british blue book

^ sir h. kennard to viscount halifax (received 10 a. m.). cited in the british blue book

^ sir n. henderson to viscount halifax (received 9:30 a. m. 31 august) cited in the british blue book

^ oslon and cloud,"a question of honor" p. 50

^ seidner, stanley s. marshal edward śmigły-rydz rydz and the defence of poland, new york, 1978, ch. 2

^ roger manvell, heinrich fraenkel, heinrich himmler: the ss, gestapo, his life and career, skyhorse publishing inc., 2007, isbn 1-60239-178-5, google books, p. 76

^ jentz 1996, p. 88.

^ jentz 1996, p. 91.

^ jentz 1996, pp. 90–91.

^ b.h. hart & a.j.p. taylor, p. 41

^ a b matthew cooper, the german army 1939–1945: its political and military failure

^ bombers of the luftwaffe, joachim dressel and manfred griehl, arms and armour, 1994

^ the flying pencil, heinz j. nowarra, schiffer publishing, 1990, p. 25

^ a history of world war two, a.j.p. taylor, octopus, 1974, p. 35

^ seidner, marshal edward śmigły-rydz rydz and the defence of poland, p. 162

^ seidner, marshal edward śmigły-rydz rydz and the defence of poland, p. 177

^ seidner, marshal edward śmigły-rydz rydz and the defence of poland, pp. 270–94

^ seidner, marshal edward śmigły-rydz rydz and the defence of poland, pp. 135–138

^ seidner, marshal edward śmigły-rydz rydz and the defence of poland, p. 158

^ michael alfred peszke, poland's preparation for world war ii, military affairs 43 (feb 1979): 18–24

^ michael alfred peszke, polish underground army, the western allies, and the failure of strategic unity in world war ii, mcfarland & company, 2004, isbn 0-7864-2009-x, google print, p.2

^ adam kurowski 'lotnictwo polskie 1939' 129

^ 'duel for the sky' by christopher shores

^ seidner, marshal edward śmigły-rydz rydz and the defence of poland, pp. 162–63

^ mazur, wojciech (march 2009). "pomocnik historyczny". polityka. 3/2009: 103.

^ banach, michał. "pzl 46 sum następca karasia". http://www.smartage.pl. retrieved 30 november 2018. external link in |website= (help)

^ seidner, marshal edward śmigły-rydz rydz and the defence of poland, pp. 122–123

^ 7tp vol.ii, janusz magnus#1, militaria 317, warszawa 2009.

^ zawadzki, tadeusz. ""porównanie sił"". polityka. polityka. wydanie specjalne 3/2009 (3.2009): 112.

^ knickerbocker, h.r. (1941). is tomorrow hitler's? 200 questions on the battle of mankind. reynal & hitchcock. pp. 29–30. isbn 978-1-4179-9277-5.

^ seidner, marshal edward śmigły-rydz rydz and the defence of poland, pp. 68–72

^ seidner, marshal edward śmigły-rydz rydz and the defence of poland, pp. 122–25

^ collective work (1979). wojna obronna polski 1939 (in polish). warsaw: wydawnictwo ministerstwa obrony narodowej. p. 933.

^ henryk piątkowski (1943). kampania wrześniowa 1939 roku w polsce (in polish). jerusalem: sekcja wydawnicza apw. p. 39. retrieved 2 november 2011.

^ count edward raczyński (1948). the british-polish alliance; its origin and meaning. london: mellville press.

^ seidner, marshal edward śmigły-rydz rydz and the defence of poland, pp. 304–310

^ a b c d seidner, marshal edward śmigły-rydz rydz and the defence of poland, p. 312

^ a b peszke, michael alfred (february 1999). poland's navy, 1918–1945. hippocrene books. p. 37. isbn 978-0-7818-0672-5.

^ https://www.tygodnikprzeglad.pl/kiedy-zaczela-sie-ii-wojna-swiatowa/

^ https://www.polskieradio.pl/205/3798/artykul/1206522,plonaca-granica-scenariusz-i-realizacja-wlodzimierz-frackiewicz-slawomir-koehler-tvp-2011

^ a b e.r. hooton, p. 87

^ a b c d gunther, john (1940). inside europe. new york: harper & brothers. pp. xvi–xvii.

^ "poles holding line 30 miles from warsaw". the gettysburg times. gettysburg, pennsylvania. 7 september 1939. p. 9.

^ a b c stanley s. seidner, "reflections from rumania and beyond: marshal śmigły-rydz rydz in exile," the polish review vol. xxii, no. 2, 1977, pp. 29–51.

^ czesław grzelak, henryk stańczyk (2005), kampania polska 1939 roku, oficyna wydawnicza rytm warszawa, p. 182. isbn 83-7399-169-7.

^ a b e.r. hooton, p. 91

^ tippelskirch, kurt. history of second world war

^ roberts, geoffrey (1 january 1992). "the soviet decision for a pact with nazi germany". soviet studies. 44 (1): 57–78. doi:10.1080/09668139208411994. jstor 152247.

^ telegram: the german ambassador in the soviet union, (schulenburg) to the german foreign office. moscow, 10 september 1939 – 9:40 p.m. and telegram 2: he german ambassador in the soviet union (schulenburg) to the german foreign office. moscow, 16 september 1939. source: the avalon project at yale law school. last. retrieved 14 november 2006

^ tadeusz piotrowski (1998). poland's holocaust: ethnic strife, collaboration with occupying forces and genocide…. mcfarland & company. isbn 978-0-7864-0371-4  – via google books.

^ piotrowski 1998, p. 295.

^ sanford, p. 23; (in polish) olszyna-wilczyński józef konstanty, internetowa encyklopedia pwn. retrieved 14 november 2006.

^ (in polish) śledztwo w sprawie zabójstwa w dniu 22 września 1939 r. w okolicach miejscowości sopoćkinie generała brygady wojska polskiego józefa olszyny-wilczyńskiego i jego adiutanta kapitana mieczysława strzemskiego przez żołnierzy b. związku radzieckiego. (s 6/02/zk) polish institute of national remembrance. internet archive, 16.10.03. retrieved 16 july 2007.

^ piotrowski 1998, pp. 54–56, p. 199.

^ a b (sanford 2005, pp. 20–24)

^ seidner, marshal edward śmigły-rydz rydz and the defence of poland, pp. 226–28

^ seidner, marshal edward śmigły-rydz rydz and the defence of poland, pp. 279–80

^ peter david orr (2005), peace at daggers drawn pp. 28-29 with more speech. isbn 1-4137-4829-5.

^ seidner, marshal edward śmigły-rydz rydz and the defence of poland, pp. 289–91

^ richard j. evans, the third reich at war, p. 102

^ bytwerk, randall. "the argument for genocide in nazi propaganda." quarterly journal of speech 91, no.1 (february 2005): 37–62

^ corum 2013, p. 174.

^ rossino, alexander b. hitler strikes poland: blitzkrieg, ideology, and atrocity lawrence, kansas: university press of kansas, 2003

^ butler 2001, p. 45.

^ rossino 2003, pp. 114, 159–161.

^ piotrowski 1998, p. 301.

^ (in polish) tomasz chinciński, niemiecka dywersja w polsce w 1939 r. w świetle dokumentów policyjnych i wojskowych ii rzeczypospolitej oraz służb specjalnych iii rzeszy. część 1 (marzec–sierpień 1939 r.). pamięć i sprawiedliwość. nr 2 (8)/2005

^ a b c d andreas toppe, militär und kriegsvölkerrecht: rechtsnorm, fachdiskurs und kriegspraxis in deutschland 1899–1940, oldenbourg wissenschaftsverlag, 2008, p. 398, isbn 3-486-58206-2

^ andreas toppe, militär und kriegsvölkerrecht: rechtsnorm, fachdiskurs und kriegspraxis in deutschland 1899–1940, oldenbourg wissenschaftsverlag, 2008, p. 397, isbn 3-486-58206-2

^ кривошеин с.м. междубурье. воспоминания. воронеж, 1964. (krivoshein s.m. between the storms. memoirs. voronezh, 1964. in russian); guderian h. erinnerungen eines soldaten heidelberg, 1951 (english: memoirs of a soldier)

^ raack, richard (1995). stalin's drive to the west, 1938–1945. stanford university press. p. 58. isbn 978-0-8047-2415-9. retrieved 2 november 2011.

^ clark, lloyd, kursk: the greatest battle: eastern front 1943, 2011, pp. 62, 67, 76–80

^ a b clark, lloyd, kursk: the greatest battle: eastern front 1943, 2011, p. 62

^ weinberg, gerhard l. (2005). a world at arms. isbn 978-0-521-61826-7. retrieved 2 november 2011.

^ welch, david a. (25 august 1995). justice and the genesis of war. isbn 978-0-521-55868-6.

^ a b "polish experts lower nation's wwii death toll". afp/expatica. 30 july 2009. retrieved 4 november 2009.

^ wojciech materski and tomasz szarota. polska 1939–1945. straty osobowe i ofiary represji pod dwiema okupacjami.institute of national remembrance(ipn) warszawa 2009 isbn 978-83-7629-067-6

^ a.o. robert westerby en r.m. low, the polish gold (london 1940), 1–18, ingo loose, kredite für ns-verbrechen. die deutsche kreditinstituten im polen und die ausraubung der polnischen un jüdischen bevölkerung 1939–1945 (münchen 2007), 64–67, anita j. prazmowska, britain and poland 1939–1943. the betrayed ally (1995), 21

^ "archived copy". archived from the original on 4 march 2016. retrieved 10 january 2016.cs1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ huiskamp, florian (2015). zonder vrees en zonder verwijt. poolse militairen in west-europa tijdens de tweede wereldoorlog. amsterdam. pp. 64–65.

^ "lc online catalog - item information (full record)". catalog.loc.gov.

^ henryk smaczny, księga kawalerii polskiej ("book of polish cavalry"), tesco, warszawa 1989, isbn 83-00-02555-3

^ "cavalry myth".

^ steven j. zaloga, ramiro bujeiro, howard gerrard, poland 1939: the birth of blitzkrieg, osprey publishing, 2002, isbn 1-84176-408-6, google print, p.50

^ overy, richard j., the air war: 1939–1945, london, europa publications, 1980. p. 28

^ "invasion of poland – fall weiss". www.achtungpanzer.com.

^ encyklopedia ii wojny światowej, p. 670

^ bekker, cajus (1964) angriffshohe 285 aircraft destroyed, 279 damaged of initial force

^ seidner, marshal edward śmigły-rydz and the defence of poland, ch. 3

^ matthew cooper, the german army 1939–1945: its political and military failure, p. 176

^ ellis, john (1999). brute force: allied strategy and tactics in the second world war, pp. 3–4

^ matthew cooper, the german army 1939–1945: its political and military failure, p. 4


sources[edit]
.mw-parser-output .refbegin{font-size:90%;margin-bottom:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indents>ul{list-style-type:none;margin-left:0}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indents>ul>li,.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indents>dl>dd{margin-left:0;padding-left:3.2em;text-indent:-3.2em;list-style:none}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-100{font-size:100%}
baliszewski, dariusz (10 october 2004). "wojna sukcesów". wprost (in polish) (1141). retrieved 24 march 2005.
baliszewski, dariusz (19 september 2004). "most honoru". wprost (in polish) (1138). archived from the original on 14 may 2007. retrieved 24 march 2005.
cooper, matthew (1978). the german army 1939–1945: its political and military failure. new york: stein and day. isbn 978-0-8128-2468-1.
corum, james s. (2013). "the luftwaffe's campaigns in poland and the west 1939–1940: a case study of handling innovation in wartime". security and defence quarterly (1): 158–189. doi:10.5604/23008741.1191778 (inactive 2018-09-08).
chodakiewicz, marek jan (2004). between nazis and soviets: occupation politics in poland, 1939–1947. lexington books. isbn 978-0-7391-0484-2.
ellis, john (1999). brute force: allied strategy and tactics in the second world war (1st us ed.). viking adult. isbn 978-0-670-80773-4.
fischer, benjamin b. (winter 1999–2000). "the katyn controversy: stalin's killing field". studies in intelligence. retrieved 10 december 2005.
goldman, stuart d. (2012). nomonhan, 1939; the red army's victory that shaped world war ii. naval institute press. isbn 978-1-59114-329-1.
hahn, fritz (1986–1987). waffen und geheimwaffen des deutschen heeres 1933–1945 [weapons and secret weapons of the german army, 1933–1945]. koblenz: bernard & graefe. isbn 978-3-7637-5830-2.
hooton, e.r. (2007). luftwaffe at war: gathering storm 1933–1939. i. london: chevron/ian allan. isbn 978-1-903223-71-0.
jentz, thomas (1996). panzertruppen: the complete guide to the creation & combat employment of germany's tank force 1933–1942 (v. 1). atglen: schiffer. isbn 978-0887409158.
kennedy, robert m. (1980). the german campaign in poland (1939). zenger. isbn 978-0-89201-064-6.
kushner, tony; knox, katharine (1999). refugees in an age of genocide. london, new york: routledge. isbn 978-0-7146-4783-8. retrieved 2 november 2011.
lukas, richard c. (2001). forgotten holocaust: the poles under german occupation, 1939–1944. hippocrene books. isbn 978-0-7818-0901-6.
majer, diemut;  et al. (2003). non-germans under the third reich: the nazi judicial and administrative system in germany and occupied eastern europe, with special regard to occupied poland, 1939–1945. johns hopkins university press. isbn 978-0-8018-6493-3.
"nazi loss in poland placed at 290,000". the new york times (press release). 28 september 1941. retrieved 17 january 2009.
prazmowska, anita j. (1995). britain and poland 1939–1943: the betrayed ally. cambridge: cambridge university press. isbn 978-0-521-48385-8.
piotrowski, tadeusz (1998). poland's holocaust: ethnic strife, collaboration with occupying forces and genocide in the second republic, 1918–1947. jefferson, nc: mcfarland & company. isbn 978-0-7864-2913-4.
sanford, george (2005). katyn and the soviet massacre of 1940: truth, justice and memory. london, new york: routledge. isbn 978-0-415-33873-8.
seidner, stanley s. (1978). marshal edward śmigły-rydz: rydz and the defence of poland. new york.
taylor, a.j.p.; mayer, s.l., eds. (1974). a history of world war two. london: octopus books. isbn 978-0-7064-0399-2.
weinberg, gerhard (1994). a world at arms: a global history of world war ii. cambridge: cambridge university press. isbn 978-0-521-44317-3.
zaloga, steve; gerrard, howard (2002). poland 1939: the birth of blitzkrieg. oxford: osprey publishing. isbn 978-1-84176-408-5.
zaloga, steve (1982). the polish army 1939–1945. oxford: osprey publishing. isbn 978-0-85045-417-8.
"kampania wrześniowa 1939". internetowa encyklopedia pwn (in polish). archived from the original on 27 september 2005. retrieved 10 december 2005.

further reading[edit]
böhler, jochen (2006). auftakt zum vernichtungskrieg; die wehrmacht in polen 1939 (preface to the war of annihilation: wehrmacht in poland) (in german). frankfurt: fischer taschenbuch verlag. isbn 978-3-596-16307-6.
gross, jan t. (2002). revolution from abroad: the soviet conquest of poland's western ukraine and western belorussia. princeton: princeton university press. isbn 978-0-691-09603-2.
external links[edit]



wikiquote has quotations related to: polish september campaign



wikimedia commons has media related to polish defensive war of 1939.



wikisource has original text related to this article:
adolf hitler's proclamation to the german army (1 september 1939)



wikisource has original text related to this article:
adolf hitler's address to the reichstag (1 september 1939)



wikisource has original text related to this article:
communication from the german government to the british government in response to great britain's ultimatum (3 september 1939)



wikisource has original text related to this article:
adolf hitler's proclamation to the german people (3 september 1939)
the conquest of poland and the beginnings of jewish persecution on the yad vashem website
german invasion of poland original reports from the times
detailed outline of campaign, mainly from german documents
the campaign in poland at worldwar2 database
the campaign in poland at achtung! panzer
german statistics including september campaign losses
brief campaign losses and more statistics
fall weiß – the fall of poland
radio reports on the german invasion of poland and nazi broadcast claiming that germany's action is an act of defence
headline story on bbc: germany invades poland 1 september 1939.
halford mackinder's necessary war an essay describing the polish campaign in a larger strategic context of the war
detailed polish army organization schemas by dr. leo niehorster
detailed german army organization schemas by dr. leo niehorster
polish armoured units 1939
nazi invasion of poland in 1939: images and documents from the harrison forman collection
"the polish campaign of september 1939 in perspective" polish news, 24 september 2008
invasion of poland by bradley lightbody, last updated 2011-03-30
the mythical polish cavalry charge
cavalry brigade, propaganda, misconceptions and lost opportunity
polish forces in the west. a website describing the polish forces in france, uk and the netherlands
war propaganda newsreel
advance into poland. national archives and records administration (german. series: motion picture films. g-2 army military intelligence division). internet archive: reel 1 of 4, reel 2 of 4, reel 3 of 4, reel 4 of 4
invasion of poland in 1939 by german army (1943). film bulletin n. 48 us department of the army, signal corps photographic center. internet archive.
special release - europe at war! (1939). universal studios. internet archive.
vteworld war ii
asia and the pacific
china
south-east asia
north and central pacific
south-west pacific
europe
western
eastern
mediterranean and middle east
north africa
east africa
italy
west africa
atlantic
north america
south america
casualties
military engagements
conferences
commanders
participantsallies.mw-parser-output .nobold{font-weight:normal}(leaders)
australia
belgium
brazil
canada
china
cuba
czechoslovakia
denmark
ethiopia
france
free france (from june 1940)
greece
india
italy (from september 1943)
luxembourg
mexico
netherlands
new zealand
norway
philippines (commonwealth)
poland
south africa
southern rhodesia
soviet union
tuva
united kingdom
united states
puerto rico
yugoslavia
axis andaxis-aligned(leaders)
albania
bulgaria
reorganized national government of the republic of china
independent state of croatia
finland
germany
hungary
free india
iraq
italy (until september 1943)
italian social republic
japan
manchukuo
philippines (second republic)
romania
slovakia
thailand
vichy france
armed neutrality
resistance
albania
austria
belgium
bulgaria
czech lands
denmark
estonia
ethiopia
france
germany
greece
hong kong
italy
japan
jewish
korea
latvia
lithuania
luxembourg
malaya
netherlands
northeast china
norway
philippines
poland
anti-communist
romania
thailand
soviet union
slovakia
western ukraine
vietnam
yugoslavia
monarchists
timelineprelude
africa
asia
europe
1939
poland
phoney war
winter war
atlantic
changsha
china
1940
weserübung
netherlands
belgium
france
armistice of 22 june 1940
britain
north africa
west africa
british somaliland
north china
baltic states
moldova
indochina
greece
compass
1941
east africa
yugoslavia
shanggao
greece
crete
iraq
soviet union (barbarossa)
finland
lithuania
syria and lebanon
kiev
iran
leningrad
gorky
moscow
sevastopol
pearl harbor
the outbreak of the pacific war
hong kong
philippines
changsha
malaya
borneo (1941–42)
1942
burma
changsha
java sea
coral sea
gazala
dutch harbor
 attu (occupation)
kiska
zhejiang-jiangxi
midway
rzhev
blue
stalingrad
singapore
dieppe
el alamein
guadalcanal
torch
1943
tunisia
kursk
smolensk
gorky
solomon islands
 attu
sicily
 cottage
lower dnieper
italy
armistice of cassibile
gilbert and marshall islands
 burma
 northern burma and western yunnan
changde
1944
monte cassino / shingle
narva
korsun–cherkassy
tempest
ichi-go
overlord (battle of normandy - d-day)
neptune
normandy
mariana and palau
bagration
western ukraine
tannenberg line
warsaw
eastern romania
belgrade
paris
dragoon
gothic line
market garden
estonia
crossbow
pointblank
lapland
hungary
leyte
ardennes
bodenplatte
philippines (1944–1945)
burma (1944–45)
1945
vistula–oder
iwo jima
western invasion of germany
okinawa
italy (spring 1945)
borneo
syrmian front
berlin
czechoslovakia
budapest
west hunan
guangxi
surrender of germany
project hula
manchuria
manila
borneo
taipei
atomic bombings
debate
kuril islands
shumshu
surrender of japan
end of world war ii in asia
aspectsgeneralfamines
bengal famine of 1943
chinese famine of 1942–43
greek famine of 1941-1944
dutch famine of 1944–45
vietnamese famine of 1945

air warfare of world war ii
blitzkrieg
comparative military ranks
cryptography
diplomacy
home front
united states
australian
united kingdom
lend-lease
manhattan project
military awards
military equipment
military production
nazi plunder
opposition
technology
allied cooperation
total war
strategic bombing
puppet states
women
art and world war ii
aftermath
expulsion of germans
operation paperclip
operation osoaviakhim
operation keelhaul
occupation of germany
territorial changes of germany
soviet occupations
romania
poland
hungary
baltic states
occupation of japan
first indochina war
indonesian national revolution
cold war
decolonization
treaty on the final settlement with respect to germany
popular culture
war crimes
allied war crimes
soviet war crimes
british war crimes
united states war crimes
german (forced labour) / wehrmacht war crimes
holocaust
aftermath
response
prosecution
italian war crimes
japanese war crimes
unit 731
prosecution
croatian war crimes
against the serbs
against the jews
romanian war crimes
wartimesexual violence
german military brothels
camp brothels
rape during the occupation of japan
sook ching
comfort women
rape of nanking
rape of manila
rape during the occupation of germany
rape during the liberation of france
rape during the soviet occupation of poland
prisoners
finnish prisoners of war in the soviet union
german prisoners of war in the soviet union
german prisoners of war in the united states
italian prisoners of war in the soviet union
japanese prisoners of war in the soviet union
japanese prisoners of war in world war ii
german mistreatment of soviet prisoners of war
polish prisoners of war in the soviet union
romanian prisoners of war in the soviet union
soviet prisoners of war in finland

bibliography
category
portal

vtepolish wars and conflictspiast poland
battle of cedynia
german–polish war (1002–18)
bolesław i's intervention in the kievan succession crisis
1072 war against bohemia
battle of głogów
1146 war against germany
1156 war against germany
first mongol invasion of poland (1240/41)
second mongol invasion of poland (1259/60)
third mongol invasion of poland (1287/88)
battle of legnica
polish–teutonic war (1326–32)
battle of płowce
galicia–volhynia wars








jagiellon poland
polish–lithuanian–teutonic war
battle of grunwald
polish–teutonic war (1414)
polish–teutonic war (1422)
polish–teutonic war (1431–35)
battle of grotniki
1444 war against the ottomans
battle of varna
thirteen years' war
war of the priests
polish–moldavian war
polish–lithuanian–muscovite war (1512–22)
battle of orsha
polish–teutonic war (1519–21)
polish–lithuanian–muscovite war (1534–37)
ottoman–tatar invasion of lithuania and poland
commonwealth
northern seven years' war
danzig rebellion
battle of lubieszów
siege of danzig (1577)
livonian war
livonian campaign of stephen báthory
war of the polish succession (1587–88)
battle of byczyna
1589 tatar invasion
kosiński uprising
1593 tatar invasion
nalyvaiko uprising
moldavian magnate wars
polish–ottoman war (1620–21)
polish–swedish wars
war against sigismund
battle of stångebro
polish–swedish war (1600–29)
polish–swedish war (1600–11)
battle of kircholm
polish–swedish war (1617–18)
polish–swedish war (1621–25)
polish–swedish war (1626–29)
polish–muscovite war (1605–18)
battle of kłuszyn
zebrzydowski rebellion
thirty years' war
battle of humenné
polish–ottoman war (1620–21)
battle of chocim (1621)
1624 tatar invasion
zhmaylo uprising
fedorovych uprising
smolensk war
siege of smolensk (1632–33)
polish–ottoman war (1633–34)
pawluk uprising
ostrzanin uprising
1644 tatar invasion
khmelnytsky uprising
battle of berestechko
russo-polish war (1654–67)
second northern war
the deluge
polish–cossack–tatar war (1666–71)
polish–ottoman war (1672–76)
battle of chocim (1673)
polish–ottoman war (1683–99)
battle of vienna
great northern war
war of the polish succession
war of the bar confederation
polish–russian war of 1792
kościuszko uprising
poland partitioned
napoleonic wars
peninsular war
war of the fourth coalition
prussian campaign
war of the fifth coalition
polish–austrian war
war of the sixth coalition
french invasion of russia
greater poland uprising (1848)
november uprising
january uprising
world war i
second republic
polish–ukrainian war
greater poland uprising
polish–czechoslovak war
first silesian uprising
polish–soviet war
battle of warsaw
second silesian uprising
polish–lithuanian war
third silesian uprising
second world war
world war ii
invasion of poland
polish contribution to world war ii
italian campaign
ghetto uprisings
warsaw ghetto uprising
białystok ghetto uprising
częstochowa ghetto uprising
operation tempest
operation ostra brama
lwów uprising
warsaw uprising
people's republic
warsaw pact invasion of czechoslovakia
third republic
war in afghanistan
iraq war
2003 invasion of iraq
occupation of iraq

vtenazi–soviet relations before 1941prior antagonism
anti-comintern pact
"jewish bolshevism"
spanish civil war
german occupation of czechoslovakia
political
relations before 1941
molotov–ribbentrop pact
negotiations
boundary and friendship treaty
population transfers
axis talks
gestapo–nkvd conferences
economic
economic relations
commercial agreement (1939)
commercial agreement (1940)
border and commercial agreement (1941)
military
invasion of poland
soviet invasion of poland
occupation of the baltic states
winter war
soviet occupation of bessarabia and northern bukovina
naval cruiser lützow
soviet offensive plans controversy
basis nord
komet northern sea route raid
german–soviet military parade in brest-litovsk
aftermath
operation barbarossa
eastern front
katyń massacre controversy
falsifiers of history
baltic way

category

authority control 
gnd: 4175002-0




 
						retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=invasion_of_poland&oldid=883848083"					
categories: invasion of poland1939 in polandconflicts in 1939world war ii invasionsinvasions of polandseptember 1939 eventsoctober 1939 eventshidden categories: webarchive template wayback linksarticles with russian-language external linksarticles with inconsistent citation formatscs1: long volume valuecs1 errors: external linkscs1 polish-language sources (pl)articles with polish-language external linkscs1 maint: archived copy as titleuse dmy dates from january 2013articles needing additional references from august 2017all articles needing additional referencesinterlanguage link template link numberall articles with unsourced statementsarticles with unsourced statements from october 2013pages with dois inactive since 2018cs1 german-language sources (de)commons category link is on wikidatawikipedia articles with gnd identifiers 



navigation menu


personal tools

not logged intalkcontributionscreate accountlog in 



namespaces

articletalk 




variants







views

readeditview history 



more





search



 







navigation


main pagecontentsfeatured contentcurrent eventsrandom articledonate to wikipediawikipedia store 



interaction


helpabout wikipediacommunity portalrecent changescontact page 



tools


what links hererelated changesupload filespecial pagespermanent linkpage informationwikidata itemcite this page 



print/export


create a bookdownload as pdfprintable version 



in other projects


wikimedia commonswikiquote 



languages


afrikaansالعربيةasturianuتۆرکجهবাংলাбеларускаябеларуская (тарашкевіца)‎българскиbosanskibrezhonegcatalàčeštinadanskdeutschελληνικάespañolesperantoeuskaraفارسیfrançaisfrysk한국어հայերենhrvatskibahasa indonesiaíslenskaitalianoעבריתქართულიlatviešulëtzebuergeschlietuviųmagyarмакедонскиമലയാളംमराठीbahasa melayunederlands日本語norskoccitanپنجابیpolskiportuguêsromânăрусскийscotsසිංහලsimple englishslovenčinaslovenščinaсрпски / srpskisrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиsuomisvenskaதமிழ்татарча/tatarçaไทยtürkçeукраїнськаtiếng việt中文 
edit links 





 this page was last edited on 18 february 2019, at 00:42 (utc).
text is available under the creative commons attribution-sharealike license;
additional terms may apply.  by using this site, you agree to the terms of use and privacy policy. wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the wikimedia foundation, inc., a non-profit organization.


privacy policy
about wikipedia
disclaimers
contact wikipedia
developers
cookie statement
mobile view



 

 



(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgpageparsereport":{"limitreport":{"cputime":"2.336","walltime":"2.788","ppvisitednodes":{"value":10150,"limit":1000000},"ppgeneratednodes":{"value":0,"limit":1500000},"postexpandincludesize":{"value":447852,"limit":2097152},"templateargumentsize":{"value":25693,"limit":2097152},"expansiondepth":{"value":13,"limit":40},"expensivefunctioncount":{"value":7,"limit":500},"unstrip-depth":{"value":1,"limit":20},"unstrip-size":{"value":243846,"limit":5000000},"entityaccesscount":{"value":3,"limit":400},"timingprofile":["100.00% 1962.095      1 -total"," 47.03%  922.740      2 template:reflist"," 15.01%  294.528     38 template:cite_book","  9.94%  195.064      2 template:link_language","  9.81%  192.554      2 template:ru_icon","  9.25%  181.482      1 template:infobox_military_conflict","  7.90%  155.017     11 template:isbn","  7.23%  141.768     15 template:cite_web","  6.09%  119.435      9 template:cite_journal","  4.77%   93.564      9 template:military_navigation"]},"scribunto":{"limitreport-timeusage":{"value":"0.963","limit":"10.000"},"limitreport-memusage":{"value":26662599,"limit":52428800}},"cachereport":{"origin":"mw1231","timestamp":"20190218004204","ttl":2073600,"transientcontent":false}}});mw.config.set({"wgbackendresponsetime":102,"wghostname":"mw1323"});});


