



world war ii in yugoslavia - wikipedia
document.documentelement.classname = document.documentelement.classname.replace( /(^|\s)client-nojs(\s|$)/, "$1client-js$2" );
(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgcanonicalnamespace":"","wgcanonicalspecialpagename":false,"wgnamespacenumber":0,"wgpagename":"world_war_ii_in_yugoslavia","wgtitle":"world war ii in yugoslavia","wgcurrevisionid":883952068,"wgrevisionid":883952068,"wgarticleid":7148715,"wgisarticle":true,"wgisredirect":false,"wgaction":"view","wgusername":null,"wgusergroups":["*"],"wgcategories":["webarchive template wayback links","use dmy dates from february 2012","articles needing additional references from november 2014","all articles needing additional references","articles needing additional references from december 2015","all articles with unsourced statements","articles with unsourced statements from march 2016","articles needing additional references from february 2014","wikipedia articles needing clarification from december 2015","cs1 french-language sources (fr)","cs1 serbo-croatian-language sources (sh)","cs1 slovenian-language sources (sl)","articles containing german-language text","conflicts in 1941","conflicts in 1942","conflicts in 1943","conflicts in 1944","conflicts in 1945","wars involving the balkans","independent state of croatia","yugoslavia in world war ii","world war ii occupied territories","communist revolutions"],"wgbreakframes":false,"wgpagecontentlanguage":"en","wgpagecontentmodel":"wikitext","wgseparatortransformtable":["",""],"wgdigittransformtable":["",""],"wgdefaultdateformat":"dmy","wgmonthnames":["","january","february","march","april","may","june","july","august","september","october","november","december"],"wgmonthnamesshort":["","jan","feb","mar","apr","may","jun","jul","aug","sep","oct","nov","dec"],"wgrelevantpagename":"world_war_ii_in_yugoslavia","wgrelevantarticleid":7148715,"wgrequestid":"xgrpbapaicoaak6exheaaabg","wgcspnonce":false,"wgisprobablyeditable":true,"wgrelevantpageisprobablyeditable":true,"wgrestrictionedit":[],"wgrestrictionmove":[],"wgflaggedrevsparams":{"tags":{}},"wgstablerevisionid":null,"wgcategorytreepagecategoryoptions":"{\"mode\":0,\"hideprefix\":20,\"showcount\":true,\"namespaces\":false}","wgwikieditorenabledmodules":[],"wgbetafeaturesfeatures":[],"wgmediavieweronclick":true,"wgmediaviewerenabledbydefault":true,"wgpopupsshouldsendmoduletouser":true,"wgpopupsconflictswithnavpopupgadget":false,"wgvisualeditor":{"pagelanguagecode":"en","pagelanguagedir":"ltr","pagevariantfallbacks":"en","usepageimages":true,"usepagedescriptions":true},"wgmfispagecontentmodeleditable":true,"wgmfenablefontchanger":true,"wgmfdisplaywikibasedescriptions":{"search":true,"nearby":true,"watchlist":true,"tagline":false},"wgrelatedarticles":null,"wgrelatedarticlesusecirrussearch":true,"wgrelatedarticlesonlyusecirrussearch":false,"wgwmeschemaeditattemptstepoversample":false,"wgpoweredbyhhvm":true,"wgulscurrentautonym":"english","wgnoticeproject":"wikipedia","wgcentralnoticecookiestodelete":[],"wgcentralnoticecategoriesusinglegacy":["fundraising","fundraising"],"wgwikibaseitemid":"q626006","wgscorenotelanguages":{"arabic":"العربية","catalan":"català","deutsch":"deutsch","english":"english","espanol":"español","italiano":"italiano","nederlands":"nederlands","norsk":"norsk","portugues":"português","suomi":"suomi","svenska":"svenska","vlaams":"west-vlams"},"wgscoredefaultnotelanguage":"nederlands","wgcentralauthmobiledomain":false,"wgcodemirrorenabled":true,"wgvisualeditortoolbarscrolloffset":0,"wgvisualeditorunsupportededitparams":["undo","undoafter","veswitched"],"wgeditsubmitbuttonlabelpublish":true,"oreswikiid":"enwiki","oresbaseurl":"http://ores.discovery.wmnet:8081/","oresapiversion":3});mw.loader.state({"ext.gadget.charinsert-styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site.styles":"ready","site.styles":"ready","noscript":"ready","user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site":"ready","user":"ready","user.options":"ready","user.tokens":"loading","ext.cite.styles":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.shared":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.commonprint":"ready","mediawiki.toc.styles":"ready","wikibase.client.init":"ready","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.noscript":"ready","ext.uls.interlanguage":"ready","ext.wikimediabadges":"ready","ext.3d.styles":"ready","mediawiki.skinning.interface":"ready","skins.vector.styles":"ready"});mw.loader.implement("user.tokens@0tffind",function($,jquery,require,module){/*@nomin*/mw.user.tokens.set({"edittoken":"+\\","patroltoken":"+\\","watchtoken":"+\\","csrftoken":"+\\"});
});rlpagemodules=["ext.cite.ux-enhancements","site","mediawiki.page.startup","mediawiki.page.ready","mediawiki.toc","mediawiki.searchsuggest","ext.gadget.teahouse","ext.gadget.referencetooltips","ext.gadget.watchlist-notice","ext.gadget.drn-wizard","ext.gadget.charinsert","ext.gadget.reftoolbar","ext.gadget.extra-toolbar-buttons","ext.gadget.switcher","ext.centralauth.centralautologin","mmv.head","mmv.bootstrap.autostart","ext.popups","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.init","ext.visualeditor.targetloader","ext.eventlogging","ext.wikimediaevents","ext.navigationtiming","ext.uls.eventlogger","ext.uls.init","ext.uls.compactlinks","ext.uls.interface","ext.quicksurveys.init","ext.centralnotice.geoip","ext.centralnotice.startup","skins.vector.js"];mw.loader.load(rlpagemodules);});























 





world war ii in yugoslavia 
from wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 jump to navigation
jump to search


this article needs additional citations for verification. please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed.find sources: "world war ii in yugoslavia" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · jstor (november 2014) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
world war ii in yugoslaviapart of world war iiclockwise from top left: ante pavelić visits adolf hitler at the berghof, stjepan filipović hanged by the occupation forces, draža mihailović confers with his troops, a group of chetniks with german soldiers in a village in serbia, josip broz tito with members of the british missiondate6 april 1941 – 15 may 1945(4 years, 1 month, 1 week and 2 days)locationyugoslaviaresult
allied victory

defeat of nazi germany in the balkans
defeat and overthrow of the independent state of croatia, government of national salvation, chetniks, and other axis collaborators
communist partisans abolish the monarchy and establish a communist government
establishment of democratic federal yugoslaviabelligerents
april 1941: germany italy hungary
april 1941: yugoslavia
 
1941–43: germany italy ndha vnsa cga hungary bulgaria  albania pećanac chetniks
1941–43: chetniksb supported by:   uk us
1941–43: partisans supported by:   ussr
1943–45: germany ndh vns (until 1944) chetniks cg (until 1944) hungary bulgaria (until 1944) albania (until 1944) slovene home guard
1943–45: partisans  united kingdom soviet union(1944–45)  bulgaria (1944–45) albania (1944–45) united states (limited involvement)commanders and leaders
 maximilian von weichs
 alexander löhr (pow)
 edmund glaise von horstenau
 mario roatta
 miklós horthy
 ante pavelić
 slavko kvaternik
 milan nedić
 sekula drljević 
 kosta pećanac †
 leon rupnik
 asen nikolov (bg)

 xhem hasa †
 dušan simović
 danilo kalafatović


 draža mihailović
 ilija trifunović-birčanin
 dobroslav jevđević
 pavle đurišić 
 momčilo đujić
 zaharije ostojić 
 petar baćović 
 vojislav lukačević
 jezdimir dangić

 nikola kalabić
 josip broz tito
 mihajlo apostolski
 milovan đilas
 aleksandar ranković
 kosta nađ
 peko dapčević
 koča popović
 petar drapšin
 svetozar vukmanović tempo
 arso jovanović
 sava kovačević †
 ivan gošnjak
 boris kidrič
 franc rozman stane †
 fyodor tolbukhin

 vladimir stoychevstrength
 300,000 (1944)[1]
 321,000 (1943)[2]
 170,000 (1943)[3]130,000 (1945)[4]
 40,000 (1943)[5]
 70,000 (1943)[6][7]

 12,000 (1944)[8]
 93,000 (1943)[9][10]
 100,000 (1943)[11] 800,000 (1945)[12]

 580,000 (1944)casualties and losses
 germany:[13]c19,235 killed14,805 missing;
 italy:d9,065 killed15,160 wounded6,306 missing;

 ndh:[14]99,000 killed
 partisans:[15] 245,549 killed399,880 wounded31,200 died from wounds28,925 missing
civilians killed: ≈514,000[16]–581,000[17]
total yugoslav casualties: ≈850,000[18]–1,200,000
a ^ axis puppet regime established on occupied yugoslav territory 
b ^ resistance movement. engaged in collaboration with axis forces from mid-1942 onward, lost official allied support in 1943.[19][20][21] full names: initially "chetnik detachments of the yugoslav army", then "yugoslav army in the fatherland". 
c ^ casualties in the balkan area, including greece, from april 1941 to january 1945 

d ^ including casualties in the april invasion of yugoslavia
vteworld war ii in yugoslavia
axis invasion
june 1941 uprising in eastern herzegovina
rogatica
olovo
uprising in serbia
loznica
banja koviljača
first offensive

uzice
novi pazar
mihailovic
sjenica
uprising in montenegro
pljevlja
second offensive

southeast croatia
prijedor
nanos
third offensive

trio
1942 montenegro offensive
kozara
kupres
alfa
dražgoše
livno
kočevje
fourth offensive

case white
delphin
otto
halyard
fifth offensive

case black
zvornik
grčarice
turjak castle
ožbalt
sixth offensive

kugelblitz
maibaum
seventh offensive

rösselsprung
andrijevica
ratweek
belgrade offensive
kosovo
syrmian front
knin
1945

mostar
lijevče field
odžak
nagykanizsa–körmend
poljana
niš

hungarian occupation
allied bombing campaign

vtemediterranean and middle east theatre
adriatic
north africa
east africa
mediterranean sea
gibraltar
malta
bahrain
balkans
yugoslavia
iraq
syria–lebanon
palestine
iran
sicily
italian mainland
dodecanese
corsica
dragoon
alpes-maritimes

military operations in world war ii in yugoslavia began on 6 april 1941, when the kingdom of yugoslavia was swiftly conquered by axis forces and partitioned between germany, italy, hungary, bulgaria and client regimes. subsequently, a guerrilla liberation war was fought against the axis occupying forces and their locally established puppet regimes, including the fascist independent state of croatia and the government of national salvation in the german-occupied territory of serbia, by the communist-led republican yugoslav partisans. simultaneously, a multi-side civil war was waged between the partisans, the serbian chauvinist chetniks, the croatian ustashe and home guard, serbian volunteer corps and state guard, as well as slovene home guard troops.[22]
both the yugoslav partisans and the chetnik movement initially resisted the occupation. however, after 1941, chetniks extensively and systematically collaborated with the italian occupation forces until the italian capitulation, and thereon also with german and ustashe forces.[22][23] the axis mounted a series of offensives intended to destroy the partisans, coming close to doing so in the battle of neretva and battle of sutjeska in the spring and summer of 1943.
despite the setbacks, the partisans remained a credible fighting force, with their organization gaining recognition from the western allies at the tehran conference and laying the foundations for the post-war yugoslav state. with support in logistics and air power from the western allies, and soviet ground troops in the belgrade offensive, the partisans eventually gained control of the entire country and of the border regions of trieste and carinthia.
the human cost of the war was enormous. the number of war victims is still in dispute, but is generally agreed to have been at least one million. non-combat victims included the majority of the country's jewish population, many of whom perished in concentration and extermination camps (e.g. jasenovac, banjica) run by the client regimes.
the ustashe regime (mostly croats, but also muslims and others) committed genocide against serbs, jews, roma and anti-fascist croats. the chetniks (mostly serbs, but also montenegrins and others) pursued genocide against muslims, croats and pro-partisan serbs, and the italian occupation authorities pursued violence and ethnic cleansing (italianization) against slovenes and croats. the wehrmacht carried out mass executions of civilians in retaliation for resistance activity e.g., the kragujevac massacre. ss division "prinz eugen" massacred large number of civilians and prisoners of war.[24] hungarian occupation troops massacred civilians (mostly serbs and jews) during the a major raid in southern bačka, under the pretext of suppressing resistance activities.
finally, during and after the final stages of the war, yugoslav authorities and partisan troops carried out reprisals, including the deportation of the danube swabian population, forced marches and executions of thousands of captured soldiers and civilians (predominantly croats associated with the ndh, but also slovenes and others)  fleeing their advance (the bleiburg repatriations), atrocities against the italian population in istria (the foibe massacres) and purges against serbs, hungarians and germans associated with the fascist forces.

contents

1 background
2 1941

2.1 invasion
2.2 early resistance


3 1942
4 1943

4.1 critical axis offensives
4.2 italian capitulation and allied support for the partisans


5 1944

5.1 last axis offensive
5.2 partisan growth to domination
5.3 allied advances in romania and bulgaria
5.4 liberation of belgrade and eastern yugoslavia


6 1945

6.1 partisan general offensive
6.2 final operations
6.3 aftermath


7 casualties

7.1 yugoslav casualties
7.2 german casualties
7.3 italian casualties


8 see also
9 references

9.1 bibliography




background[edit]
prior to the outbreak of war, the government of milan stojadinović (1935–1939) tried to navigate between the axis powers and the imperial powers by seeking neutral status, signing a non-aggression treaty with italy and extending its treaty of friendship with france. in the same time, the country was destabilized by internal tensions, as croatian leaders demanded a greater level of autonomy. stojadinović was sacked by the regent prince paul in 1939 and replaced by dragiša cvetković, who negotiated a compromise with croatian leader vladko maček in 1939, resulting in the formation of the banovina of croatia.
however, rather than reducing tensions, the agreement only reinforced the crisis in the country's governance.[25] groups from both sides of the political spectrum were not satisfied: the pro-fascist ustaše sought an independent croatia allied with the axis, serbian public and military circles preferred alliance with the western european empires, while the then-banned communist party of yugoslavia saw the soviet union as a natural ally.
after the fall of france to nazi germany in may 1940, the uk was the only empire in conflict with the axis powers, and prince paul and the government saw no way of saving yugoslavia except through adopting policies of accommodation with the axis powers. although hitler was not particularly interested in creating another front in the balkans, and yugoslavia itself remained at peace during the first year of the war, benito mussolini's italy had invaded albania in april 1939 and launched the rather unsuccessful italo-greek war in october 1940. these events resulted in yugoslavia's geographical isolation from potential allied support. the government tried to negotiate with the axis on cooperation with as few concessions as possible, while attempting secret negotiations with the allies and the soviet union, but those moves would fail to keep the country out of the war.[26] a secret mission to the us, led by the influential serbian-jewish captain david albala with the purpose of obtaining funding to buy arms for the expected invasion went nowhere, while stalin expelled yugoslav ambassador gavrilovic just one month after agreeing a treaty of friendship with yugoslavia.[27]

1941[edit]
having steadily fallen within the orbit of the axis during 1940 after events such as the second vienna award, yugoslavia followed bulgaria and formally joined the axis powers by signing the tripartite pact on 25 march 1941. air force officers opposed to the move staged a coup d'état and took over in the following days. these events were viewed with great apprehension in berlin, and as it was preparing to help its italian ally in its war against greece anyway, the plans were modified to include yugoslavia as well.

invasion[edit]
main article: invasion of yugoslavia
 occupation and partition of yugoslavia 1941.
on 6 april 1941 the kingdom of yugoslavia was invaded from all sides by the axis powers of germany, italy, and their ally hungary.
during the invasion, belgrade was bombed by the german air force (luftwaffe). the invasion lasted little more than ten days, ending with the unconditional surrender of the royal yugoslav army on 17 april. besides being hopelessly ill-equipped when compared to the german army (heer), the yugoslav army attempted to defend all borders but only managed to thinly spread the limited resources available. also, large numbers of the population refused to fight, instead welcoming the germans as liberators from government oppression. however, as this meant each individual ethnic group would turn to movements opposed to the unity promoted by the south slavic state, two different concepts of resistance emerged, the monarchist chetniks, and the communist partisans.[28]
two of the principal constituent national groups, slovenes and croats, were not prepared to fight in defense of a yugoslav state with a continued serb monarchy. the only effective opposition to the invasion was from units wholly from serbia itself.[29] the serbian general staff was united on the question of yugoslavia as a "greater serbia" ruled, in one way or another, by serbia. on the eve of the invasion, there were 165 generals on the yugoslav active list. of these, all but four were serbs.[30]
the terms of the capitulation were extremely severe, as the axis proceeded to dismember yugoslavia. germany annexed northern slovenia, while retaining direct occupation over a rump serbian state, and considerable influence over its newly created puppet state, the independent state of croatia, which extended over much of today's croatia and contained all of modern bosnia and herzegovina. mussolini's italy gained the remainder of slovenia, kosovo, and large chunks of the coastal dalmatia region (along with nearly all of the adriatic islands and the bay of kotor). it also gained control over the italian governorate of montenegro, and was granted the kingship in the independent state of croatia, though wielding little real power within it. hungary dispatched the hungarian third army to occupy vojvodina in northern serbia, and later forcibly annexed sections of baranja, bačka, međimurje, and prekmurje.[31]
the bulgarian army moved in on 19 april 1941, occupying nearly all of modern-day north macedonia and some districts of eastern serbia which, with greek western thrace and eastern macedonia (the aegean province), were annexed by bulgaria on 14 may.[32]
the government in exile was now only recognized by the allied powers.[33] the axis had recognized the territorial acquisitions of their allied states.[34][35]

early resistance[edit]
various military formations more or less linked to the general liberation movement were involved in armed confrontations with axis forces which erupted in various areas of yugoslavia in the ensuing weeks. .mw-parser-output .templatequote{overflow:hidden;margin:1em 0;padding:0 40px}.mw-parser-output .templatequote .templatequotecite{line-height:1.5em;text-align:left;padding-left:1.6em;margin-top:0}in the beginning there had been two resistance movements in yugoslavia, the chetniks and the partisans. the resistance of the chetniks had lasted only until the autumn of 1941, their leaders then going over to the enemy or returning to passivity.[36]

 adolf hitler in maribor, yugoslavia in 1941. he later ordered his officials "to make these lands german again".[37]
from the start, the yugoslav resistance forces consisted of two factions: the partisans, a communist-led movement propagating pan-yugoslav tolerance ("brotherhood and unity") and incorporating republican, left-wing and liberal elements of yugoslav politics, on one hand, and the chetniks, a conservative royalist and nationalist force, enjoying support almost exclusively from the serbian population in occupied yugoslavia, on the other hand. initially the chetniks received recognition from the western allies, while the partisans were supported by the soviet union.
at the very beginning, the partisan forces were relatively small, poorly armed, and without any infrastructure. but they had two major advantages over other military and paramilitary formations in former yugoslavia:  the first and most immediate advantage was a small but valuable cadre of spanish civil war veterans. unlike some of the other military and paramilitary formations, these veterans had experience with a modern war fought in circumstances quite similar to those found in world war ii yugoslavia. in slovenia, the partisans likewise drew on the experienced tigr members to train troops.
their other major advantage, which became more apparent in later stages of war, was in the partisans being founded on a communist ideology rather than ethnicity. therefore, they won support that crossed national lines, meaning they could expect at least some levels of support in almost any corner of the country, unlike other paramilitary formations limited to territories with croat or serb majority. this allowed their units to be more mobile and fill their ranks with a larger pool of potential recruits.
although the activity of the macedonian and slovene partisans were part of the yugoslav people's liberation war, the specific conditions in macedonia and slovenia, due to the strong autonomist tendencies of the local communists, led to the creation of a separate sub-armies called the people's liberation army of macedonia, and slovene partisans led by liberation front of the slovene people, respectively.
the most numerous local force, besides the four second-line german wehrmacht infantry divisions assigned to occupation duties was the croatian home guard (hrvatsko domobranstvo), founded in april 1941, a few days after the founding of the independent state of croatia (ndh) itself. it was done with the authorisation of german occupation authorities. the task of the new croatian armed forces was to defend the new state against both foreign and domestic enemies.[38]
the croatian home guard was originally limited to 16 infantry battalions and 2 cavalry squadrons – 16,000 men in total. the original 16 battalions were soon enlarged to 15 infantry regiments of two battalions each between may and june 1941, organised into five divisional commands, some 55,000 enlisted men.[39] support units included 35 light tanks supplied by italy,[40] 10 artillery battalions (equipped with captured royal yugoslav army weapons of czech origin), a cavalry regiment in zagreb and an independent cavalry battalion at sarajevo. two independent motorized infantry battalions were based at zagreb and sarajevo respectively.[41] several regiments of ustaše militia were also formed at this time, which operated under a separate command structure to, and independently from, the croatian home guard, until late 1944.[42] the home guard crushed the serb revolt in eastern herzegovina in june 1941, and in july they fought in eastern and western bosnia. they fought in eastern herzegovina again, when croatian-dalmatian and slavonian battalions reinforced local units.[41]
the italian high command assigned 24 divisions and three coastal brigades to occupation duties in yugoslavia from 1941. these units were located from slovenia, croatia and dalmatia through to montenegro and kosovo.[43]
from 1931-39, the soviet union had prepared communists for a guerrilla war in yugoslavia. on the eve of the war, hundreds of future prominent yugoslav communist leaders completed special "partisan courses" organized by the soviet military intelligence in the soviet union and spain.[44] operation barbarossa, the axis invasion of the soviet union, began on 22 june 1941.[45] on the same day, yugoslav partisans formed the 1st sisak partisan detachment, was the first armed anti-fascist resistance unit formed by a resistance movement in occupied yugoslavia during world war ii.[46] founded in the brezovica forest near sisak, croatia, its creation marked the beginning of anti-axis resistance in occupied yugoslavia.[46]
after the german attack on the soviet union on 22 june 1941, the communist party of yugoslavia formally decided to launch an armed uprising on 4 july 1941, a date which was later marked as fighter's day – a public holiday in the socialist federal republic of yugoslavia. in the village of bela crkva, spanish veteran žikica jovanović španac shot the first bullet of the campaign on 7 july 1941, a date that later became known as the "day of uprising of the socialist republic of serbia". on 10 august 1941 in stanulović, a mountain village, the partisans formed the kopaonik partisan detachment headquarters. their liberated area, consisting of nearby villages and called the "miners republic", was the first in yugoslavia, and lasted 42 days. the resistance fighters formally joined the ranks of the partisans later on.
the chetnik movement was organized after the surrender of the royal yugoslav army by some of the remaining yugoslav soldiers. this force was organized in the ravna gora district of western serbia under colonel draža mihailović. however, unlike the partisans, mihailović's forces were almost entirely ethnic serbs. he directed his units to arm themselves and await his orders for the final push. mihailović avoided direct action against the axis, which he judged were of low strategic importance.
the royalist chetniks (officially the yugoslav army in the fatherland, jvuo), under the command of general draža mihailović, drew primarily from the scattered remnants of the royal yugoslav army, relying overwhelmingly on the ethnic serbian population for support. they were formed soon after the invasion of yugoslavia and the surrender of the government on 17 april 1941. the chetniks were initially the only resistance movement recognized by the yugoslav government-in-exile and the western allies. the partisans and chetniks attempted to cooperate early during the conflict, but this quickly fell apart.

 uprising in yugoslavia, september 1941.
in september 1941, partisans organized sabotage at the general post office in zagreb.
as the levels of resistance to its occupation grew, the axis powers responded with numerous minor offensives. there were also seven major axis operations specifically aimed at eliminating all or most yugoslav partisan resistance. these major offensives were typically combined efforts by the german wehrmacht and ss, italy, chetniks, the independent state of croatia, the serbian collaborationist government, bulgaria, and hungary.
the first anti-partisan offensive was the attack conducted by the axis in autumn of 1941 against the "republic of užice", a liberated territory the partisans established in western serbia. in november 1941, german troops attacked and reoccupied this territory, with the majority of partisan forces escaping towards bosnia. it was during this offensive that tenuous collaboration between the partisans and the royalist chetnik movement broke down and turned into open hostility.
after fruitless negotiations, the chetnik leader, general mihailović, turned against the partisans as his main enemy. according to him, the reason was humanitarian: the prevention of german reprisals against serbs.[47] this however, did not stop the activities of the partisan resistance, and chetnik units attacked the partisans in november 1941, while increasingly receiving supplies and cooperating with the germans and italians in this. the british liaison to mihailović advised london to stop supplying the chetniks after the užice attack (see first anti-partisan offensive), but britain continued to do so.[48]
on 22 december 1941 the partisans formed the 1st proletarian assault brigade (1. proleterska udarna brigada) – the first regular partisan military unit capable of operating outside its local area. 22 december became the "day of the yugoslav people's army".

1942[edit]
this section relies largely or entirely on a single source. relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. please help improve this article by introducing citations to additional sources. (december 2015)
 italian armored cars in the balkans.
 german forces with french-made h39 tanks fording a river.
 yugoslav pows supervised by bulgarian soldiers and german armored car.
on 15 january 1942, the bulgarian 1st army, with 3 infantry divisions, transferred to south-eastern serbia. headquartered at niš, it replaced german divisions needed in croatia and the soviet union.[49]
the chetniks initially enjoyed the support of the western allies (up to the tehran conference in december 1943). in 1942, time magazine featured an article which praised the "success" of mihailović's chetniks and heralded him as the sole defender of freedom in nazi-occupied europe.
tito's partisans fought the germans more actively during this time. tito and mihailović had a bounty of 100,000 reichsmarks offered by germans for their heads. while "officially" remaining mortal enemies of the germans and the ustaše, the chetniks were known for making clandestine deals with the italians. the second enemy offensive was a coordinated axis attack conducted in january 1942 against partisan forces in eastern bosnia. the partisan troops once again avoided encirclement and were forced to retreat over the igman mountain near sarajevo.
the third enemy offensive, an offensive against partisan forces in eastern bosnia, montenegro, sandžak and hercegovina which took place in the spring of 1942. it was known as operation trio by the germans, and again ended with a timely partisan escape. this attack is mistakenly identified by some sources as the battle of kozara, which took place in the summer of 1942.
the partisans fought an increasingly successful guerrilla campaign against the axis occupiers and their local collaborators, including the chetniks (which they also considered collaborators). they enjoyed gradually increased levels of success and support of the general populace, and succeeded in controlling large chunks of yugoslav territory. people's committees were organized to act as civilian governments in areas of the country liberated by the partisans. in places, even limited arms industries were set up.
to gather intelligence, agents of the western allies were infiltrated into both the partisans and the chetniks. the intelligence gathered by liaisons to the resistance groups was crucial to the success of supply missions and was the primary influence on allied strategy in the yugoslavia. the search for intelligence ultimately resulted in the decline of the chetniks and their eclipse by tito's partisans. in 1942, though supplies were limited, token support was sent equally to each. in november 1942, partisan detachments were officially merged into the people's liberation army and partisan detachments of yugoslavia (nov i poj).

 german generalmajor (brigadier) friedrich stahl stands alongside an ustaša officer and chetnik commander rade radić in central bosnia in mid–1942.
1943[edit]
critical axis offensives[edit]
in the first half of 1943 two axis offensives came close to defeating the partisans.  they are known by their german code names fall weiss (case white) and fall schwarz (case black), as the battle of neretva and the battle of sutjeska after the rivers in the areas they were fought, or the fourth and fifth enemy offensive, respectively, according to former yugoslav communist historiography.
on 7 january 1943, the bulgarian 1st army also occupied south-west serbia. savage pacification measures reduced partisan activity appreciably. bulgarian infantry divisions participated in the fifth anti-partisan offensive as a blocking force of the partisan escape-route from montenegro into serbia and in the sixth anti-partisan offensive in eastern bosnia.[49]
negotiations between germans and partisans started on 11 march 1943 in gornji vakuf, bosnia. tito's key officers vladimir velebit, koča popović and milovan đilas brought three proposals, first about an exchange of prisoners, second about the implementation of international law on treatment of prisoners and third about political questions.[50]  the delegation expressed concerns about the italian involvement in supplying the chetnik army and stated that the national liberation movement is an independent movement, with no aid from the soviet union or the uk.[51] somewhat later, đilas and velebit were brought to zagreb to continue the negotiations.[52]
in the fourth enemy offensive, also known as the battle of the neretva or fall weiss (case white), axis forces pushed partisan troops to retreat from western bosnia to northern herzegovina, culminating in the partisan retreat over the neretva river. it took place from january to april, 1943.

 partisan liberated territory in yugoslavia, may 1943.
the fifth enemy offensive, also known as the battle of the sutjeska or fall schwarz (case black), immediately followed the fourth offensive and included a complete encirclement of partisan forces in southeastern bosnia and northern montenegro in may and june 1943.

in that august of my arrival [1943] there were over 30 enemy divisions on the territory of jugoslavia, as well as a large number of satellite and police formations of ustashe and domobrani (military formations of the puppet croat state), german sicherheitsdienst, chetniks, neditch militia, ljotitch militia, and others. the partisan movement may have counted up to 150,000 fighting men and women (perhaps five per cent women) in close and inextricable co-operation with several million peasants, the people of the country. partisan numbers were liable to increase rapidly.[53]

the croatian home guard reached its maximum size at the end of 1943, when it had 130,000 men. it also included an air force, the air force of the independent state of croatia (zrakoplovstvo nezavisne države hrvatske, or zndh), the backbone of which was provided by 500 former royal yugoslav air force officers and 1,600 ncos with 125 aircraft.[54] by 1943 the zndh was 9,775 strong and equipped with 295 aircraft.[42]

italian capitulation and allied support for the partisans[edit]
 uprising in occupied yugoslavia after capitulation of italy, september 1943.
on 8 september 1943, the italians concluded an armistice with the allies, leaving 17 divisions stranded in yugoslavia. all divisional commanders refused to join the germans. two italian infantry divisions joined the montenegrin partisans as complete units, while another joined the albanian partisans. other units surrendered to the germans to face imprisonment in germany or summary execution. others surrendered themselves, arms, ammunition and equipment to croatian forces or to the partisans, simply disintegrated, or reached italy on foot via trieste or by ship across the adriatic.[39] the italian governorship of dalmatia was disestablished and the country's possessions were subsequently divided between germany, which established its operational zone of the adriatic littoral, and the independent state of croatia, which established the new district of sidraga-ravni kotari. the former italian kingdoms of albania and of montenegro were placed under german occupation.
the events, which occurred in 1943 would bring about change in the attitude of the allies. the germans were executing operation schwarz (battle of sutjeska, the fifth anti-partisan offensive), one of a series of offensives aimed at the resistance fighters, when f.w.d. deakin was sent by the british to gather information. his reports contained two important observations. the first was that the partisans were courageous and aggressive in battling the german 1st mountain and 104th light division, had suffered significant casualties, and required support. the second observation was that the entire german 1st mountain division had transited from the soviet union on rail lines through chetnik-controlled territory. british intercepts (ultra) of german message traffic confirmed chetnik timidity. even though today many circumstances, facts, and motivations remain unclear, intelligence reports resulted in increased allied interest in yugoslavia air operations and shifted policy.
the sixth enemy offensive was a series of operations undertaken by the wehrmacht and the ustaše after the capitulation of italy in an attempt to secure the adriatic coast. it took place in the autumn and winter of 1943/1944.
at this point the partisans were able to win the moral, as well as limited material support of the western allies, who until then had supported general draža mihailović's chetnik forces, but were finally convinced of their collaboration by many intelligence-gathering missions dispatched to both sides during the course of the war.
in september 1943, at churchill's request, brigadier general fitzroy maclean was parachuted to tito's headquarters near drvar to serve as a permanent, formal liaison to the partisans. while the chetniks were still occasionally supplied, the partisans received the bulk of all future support.[55]
when the avnoj (the partisan wartime council in yugoslavia) was eventually recognized by the allies, by late 1943, the official recognition of the partisan democratic federal yugoslavia soon followed. the national liberation army of yugoslavia was recognized by the major allied powers at the tehran conference, when united states agreed to the position of other allied.[56] the newly recognized yugoslav government, headed by prime minister josip broz tito, was a joint body formed of avnoj members and the members of the former government-in-exile in london. the resolution of a fundamental question, whether the new state remained a monarchy or was to be a republic, was postponed until the end of the war, as was the status of king peter ii.
subsequent to switching their support to the partisans, the allies set-up the raf balkan air force (under the suggestion of brigadier-general fitzroy maclean) with the aim to provide increased supplies and tactical air support for marshal tito's partisan forces.

1944[edit]
last axis offensive[edit]
in january 1944, tito's forces unsuccessfully attacked banja luka. but, while tito was forced to withdraw, mihajlović and his forces were also noted by the western press for their lack of activity.[57]
the seventh enemy offensive was the final axis attack in western bosnia in the spring of 1944, which included operation rösselsprung (knight's leap), an unsuccessful attempt to eliminate josip broz tito personally and annihilate the leadership of the partisan movement.

partisan growth to domination[edit]
 marshal tito talking with brigadier general fitzroy maclean
allied aircraft specifically started targeting zndh (air force of the independent state of croatia) and luftwaffe bases and aircraft for the first time as a result of the seventh offensive, including operation rösselsprung in late may 1944. up until then axis aircraft could fly inland almost at will, as long as they remained at low altitude. partisan units on the ground frequently complained about enemy aircraft attacking them while hundreds of allied aircraft flew above at higher altitude. this changed during rösselsprung as allied fighter-bombers went low en-masse for the first time, establishing full aerial superiority. consequently, both the zndh and luftwaffe were forced to limit their operations in clear weather to early morning and late afternoon hours.[58]
the yugoslav partisan movement grew to become the largest resistance force in occupied europe, with 800,000 men organized in 4 field armies. eventually the partisans prevailed against all of their opponents as the official army of the newly founded democratic federal yugoslavia (later socialist federal republic of yugoslavia).
in 1944, the macedonian and serbian commands made contact in southern serbia and formed a joint command, which consequently placed the macedonian partisans under the direct command of marshal josip broz tito.[59] the slovene partisans also merged with tito's forces in 1944.[60][61]
on 16 june 1944, the tito-šubašić agreement between the partisans and the yugoslav government in exile of king peter ii was signed on the island of vis. this agreement was an attempt to form a new yugoslav government which would include both the communists and the royalists. it called for a merge of the partisan anti-fascist council of national liberation of yugoslavia (antifašističko v(ij)eće narodnog oslobođenja jugoslavije, avnoj) and the government in exile. the tito-šubašić agreement also called on all slovenes, croats, and serbs to join the partisans. the partisans were recognized by the royal government as yugoslavia's regular army. mihajlović and many chetniks refused to answer the call. the chetniks were, however, praised for saving 500 downed allied pilots in 1944; united states president harry s. truman posthumously awarded mihailović the legion of merit for his contribution to the allied victory.[citation needed]

allied advances in romania and bulgaria[edit]
 map of german retreat in autumn 1944 (week by week)
in august 1944 after the jassy-kishinev offensive overwhelmed the front line of germany's army group south ukraine, king michael i of romania staged a coup, romania quit the war, and the romanian army was placed under the command of the red army. romanian forces, fighting against germany, participated in the prague offensive. bulgaria quit as well and, on 10 september, declared war on germany and its remaining allies. the weak divisions sent by the axis powers to invade bulgaria were easily driven back. in macedonia, the bulgarian troops, surrounded by german forces and betrayed by high-ranking military commanders, fought their way back to the old borders of bulgaria. in late september 1944 three bulgarian armies, some 455,000 strong in total led by general georgi marinov mandjev from the village of goliamo sharkovo – elhovo, entered yugoslavia with the strategic task of blocking the german forces withdrawing from greece. southern and eastern serbia and macedonia were liberated within two months and the 130,000-strong bulgarian first army continued to hungary.
on 10 september 1944, bulgaria changed sides and declared war on germany as an allied power. the germans swiftly disarmed the 1st occupation corps of 5 divisions and the 5th army, despite short-lived resistance by the latter. survivors retreated to the old borders of bulgaria. after the occupation of bulgaria by the soviet army negotiations between tito and the bulgarian communist leaders were organized, resulting in a military alliance between them. the new bulgarian peoples army and the red army 3rd ukrainian front troops were concentrated at the old bulgarian-yugoslav border. on 8 october, they entered yugoslavia. the first and fourth bulgarian armies invaded vardar macedonia, and the second army south-eastern serbia. the first army then swung north with the soviet 3rd ukrainian front, through eastern yugoslavia and south-western hungary, before linking up with the british 8th army in austria in may 1945.[62]

liberation of belgrade and eastern yugoslavia[edit]
 territories under partisan control, september 1944
concurrently, with allied air support and assistance from the red army, the partisans turned their attention to central serbia. the chief objective was to disrupt railroad communications in the valleys of the vardar and morava rivers, and prevent germans from withdrawing their 300,000+ forces from greece.
the allied air forces sent 1,973 aircraft (mostly from the us 15th air force) over yugoslavia, which discharged over 3,000 tons of bombs. on 17 august 1944 marshal josip broz tito offered an amnesty to all collaborators. on 12 september, king peter broadcast a message from london, calling upon all serbs, croats and slovenes to "join the national liberation army under the leadership of marshal tito".  the message had a devastating effect on the morale of the chetniks. many of them switched sides to the partisans.
in september, the red army and the partisans launched the belgrade offensive, and took the city on 20 october. at the onset of winter, the partisans effectively controlled the entire eastern half of yugoslavia—serbia, macedonia, montenegro—as well as most of the dalmatian coast. the wehrmacht and the forces of the ustaše-controlled independent state of croatia fortified a front in syrmia that held through the winter of 1944–45 in order to aid the evacuation of german army group e from the balkans. to raise the number of partisan troops tito  again offered the amnesty on 21 november 1944. in november 1944, the units of the ustaše militia and the croatian home guard were reorganized and combined to form the army of the independent state of croatia.[42]

1945[edit]
every german unit which could safely evacuate from jugoslavia might count itself lucky.[63]

the germans continued their retreat. having lost the easier withdrawal route through serbia, they fought to hold the syrmian front in order to secure the more difficult passage through kosovo, sandzak and bosnia. they even scored a series of temporary successes against the people's liberation army. they left mostar on 22 february 1945. they did not leave sarajevo until 15 april. sarajevo had assumed a last-moment strategic position as the only remaining withdrawal route and was held at substantial cost. in early march the germans moved troops from southern bosnia to support an unsuccessful counter-offensive in hungary, which enabled the nov to score some successes by attacking the germans' weakened positions. although strengthened by allied aid, a secure rear and mass conscription in areas under their control, the one-time partisans found it difficult to switch to conventional warfare, particularly in the open country west of belgrade, where the germans held their own until mid-april in spite of all of the raw and untrained conscripts the nov hurled in a bloody war of attrition against the syrmian front.[64]
on 8 march 1945, a coalition yugoslav government was formed in belgrade with tito as premier and ivan šubašić as foreign minister.

partisan general offensive[edit]
on 20 march 1945, the partisans launched a general offensive in the mostar-višegrad-drina sector. with large swaths of bosnian, croatian and slovenian countryside already under partisan guerrilla control, the final operations consisted in connecting these territories and capturing major cities and roads. for the general offensive marshal josip broz tito commanded a partisan force of about 800,000 men organized into four armies: the 1st army commanded by peko dapčević, 2nd army commanded by koča popović, 3rd army commanded by kosta nađ, and the 4th army commanded by petar drapšin. in addition, the yugoslav partisans had eight independent army corps (the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, 9th, and the 10th).
set against the yugoslav partisans was german general alexander löhr of army group e (heeresgruppe e). this army group had seven army corps (the xv mountain, xv cossack, xxi mountain, xxxiv, lxix, and lxxxxvii). these corps included seventeen weakened divisions (1st cossack, 2nd cossack, 7th ss, 11th luftwaffe field division, 22nd, 41st, 104th, 117th, 138th, 181st, 188th,  237th, 297th, 369th croat, 373rd croat, 392nd croat and the 14th ss ukrainian division). in addition to the seven corps, the axis had remnant naval and luftwaffe forces, under constant attack by the british royal navy, royal air force and united states air force.[65]

 british raf field regiment in croatia with german prisoners captured by partisan forces at bihać
the army of the independent state of croatia was at the time composed of eighteen divisions: 13 infantry, two mountain, two assault and one replacement croatian divisions, each with its own organic artillery and other support units. there were also several armoured units. from early 1945, the croatian divisions were allocated to various german corps and by march 1945 were holding the southern front.[42] securing the rear areas were some 32,000 men of the croatian gendarmerie (hrvatsko oruznistvo), organised into 5 police volunteer regiments plus 15 independent battalions, equipped with standard light infantry weapons, including mortars.[66]
the air force of the independent state of croatia (zrakoplovstvo nezavisne države hrvatske, or zndh) and the units of the croatian air force legion (hrvatska zrakoplovna legija, or hzl), returned from service on the eastern front provided some level of air support (attack, fighter and transport) right up until may 1945, encountering and sometimes defeating opposing aircraft from the british royal air force, united states air force and the soviet air force. although 1944 had been a catastrophic year for the zndh, with aircraft losses amounting to 234, primarily on the ground, it entered 1945 with 196 machines. further deliveries of new aircraft from germany continued in the early months of 1945 to replace losses. by 10 march, the zndh had 23 messerschmitt 109 g&ks, three morane-saulnier m.s.406, six fiat g.50, and two messerschmitt 110 g fighters.  the final deliveries of up-to-date german messerschmitt 109 g and k fighter aircraft were still taking place in march 1945.[67] and the zndh still had 176 aircraft on its strength in april 1945.[68]
between 30 march and 8 april 1945, general mihailović's chetniks mounted a final attempt to establish themselves as a credible force fighting the axis in yugoslavia. the chetniks under lieutenant colonel pavle đurišić fought a combination of ustaša and croatian home guard forces in the battle on lijevča field. in late march 1945 elite ndh army units were withdrawn from the syrmian front to destroy djurisic's chetniks trying to make their way across the northern ndh.[69] the battle was fought near banja luka in what was then the independent state of croatia and ended in a decisive victory for the independent state of croatia forces.
serbian units included the remnants of the serbian state guard and the serbian volunteer corps from the serbian military administration. there were even some units of the slovene home guard (slovensko domobranstvo, sd) still intact in slovenia.[70]
by the end of march, 1945, it was obvious to the croatian army command that, although the front remained intact, they would eventually be defeated by sheer lack of ammunition. for this reason, the decision was made to retreat into austria, in order to surrender to the british forces advancing north from italy.[71] the german army was in the process of disintegration and the supply system lay in ruins.[72]
bihać was liberated by the partisans the same day that the general offensive was launched. the 4th army, under the command of petar drapšin, broke through the defences of the xvth ss cossack cavalry corps. by 20 april, drapšin liberated lika and the croatian littoral, including the islands, and reached the old yugoslav border with italy. on 1 may, after capturing the italian territories of rijeka and istria from the german lxxxxvii corps, the yugoslav 4th army beat the western allies to trieste by one day.
the yugoslav 2nd army, under the command of koča popović, forced a crossing of the bosna river on 5 april, capturing doboj, and reached the una river.  on 6 april, the 2nd, 3rd, and 5th corps of the yugoslav partisans took sarajevo from the german xxi corps. on 12 april, the yugoslav 3rd army, under the command of kosta nađ, forced a crossing of the drava river. the 3rd army then fanned out through podravina, reached a point north of zagreb, and crossed the old austrian border with yugoslavia in the dravograd sector. the 3rd army closed the ring around the enemy forces when its advanced motorized detachments linked up with detachments of the 4th army in carinthia.
also, on 12 april, the yugoslav 1st army, under the command of peko dapčević penetrated the fortified front of the german xxxiv corps in syrmia. by 22 april, the 1st army had smashed the fortifications and was advancing towards zagreb.
the long-drawn out liberation of western yugoslavia caused more victims among the population. the breakthrough of the syrmian front on 12 april was, in milovan đilas's words, "the greatest and bloodiest battle our army had ever fought", and it would not have been possible had it not been for soviet instructors and arms.[73]
by the time general peko dapčević's nov units had reached zagreb, on 9 may 1945, they had perhaps lost as many as 36,000 dead. there were by then over 400,000 refugees in zagreb.[74] after entering zagreb with the yugoslav 2nd army, both armies advanced in slovenia.

final operations[edit]
 front lines in europe 1 may 1945.
on 2 may, the german capital city, berlin, fell to the red army. on 8 may 1945, the germans surrendered unconditionally and the war in europe officially ended. the italians had quit the war in 1943, the bulgarians in 1944, and the hungarians earlier in 1945. despite the german capitulation, however, sporadic fighting still took place in yugoslavia. on 7 may, zagreb was evacuated, on 9 may, maribor and ljubljana were captured by the partisans, and general alexander löhr, commander-in-chief of army group e was forced to sign the total surrender of the forces under his command at topolšica, near velenje, slovenia, on wednesday 9 may 1945. only the croatian and other anti-partisan forces remained.
from 10 to 15 may, the yugoslav partisans continued to face resistance from croatian, and other anti-partisan forces throughout the rest of croatia and slovenia. the battle of poljana, the last battle of world war ii in europe, started on 14 may, ending on 15 may 1945 at poljana, near prevalje in slovenia. it was the culmination and last of a series of battles between yugoslav partisans and a large (in excess of 30,000) mixed column of german army (heer) soldiers together with croatian ustaše, croatian home guard, slovenian home guard, and other anti-partisan forces who were attempting to retreat to austria.

aftermath[edit]
this article needs additional citations for verification. please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed.find sources: "world war ii in yugoslavia" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · jstor (february 2014) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
on 5 may, in the town of palmanova (50 km northwest of trieste), between 2,400 and 2,800 members of the serbian volunteer corps surrendered to the british. on 12 may, about 2,500 additional serbian volunteer corps members surrendered to the british at unterbergen on the drava river.
on 11 and 12 may, british troops in klagenfurt, austria, were harassed by arriving forces of the yugoslav partisans.[why?] in belgrade, the british ambassador to the yugoslav coalition government handed tito a note demanding that the yugoslav troops withdraw from austria.
on 15 may 1945 a large column of the croatian home guard, the ustaše, the xvth ss cossack cavalry corps and the remnants of the serbian state guard, and the serbian volunteer corps, arrived at the southern austrian border near the town of bleiburg. the representatives of the independent state of croatia attempted to negotiate a surrender to the british under the terms of the geneva convention that they had joined in 1943, and were recognised by it as a "belligerent", but were ignored.[71] most of the people in the column were turned over to the yugoslav government as part of what is sometimes referred to as operation keelhaul. following the bleiburg repatriations, the partisans proceeded to brutalize the pows.
on 15 may, tito had placed partisan forces in austria under allied control. a few days later he agreed to withdraw them. by 20 may, yugoslav troops in austria had begun to withdraw. on 8 june, the united states, the united kingdom, and yugoslavia agreed on the control of trieste. on 11 november, parliamentary elections were held in yugoslavia. in these elections the communists had an important advantage because they controlled the police, judiciary and media. for that reason the opposition did not want to participate in the elections.[75] on 29 november, in accordance with election result, peter ii was deposed by communist dominated yugoslavia's constituent assembly.[76] on the same day, the federal people's republic of yugoslavia was established as a socialist state during the first meeting of the yugoslav parliament in belgrade. josip broz tito was appointed prime minister. the autonomist wing in the communist party of macedonia, which dominated during world war ii, was finally pushed aside in 1945 after the second assembly of the asnom.
on 13 march 1946, mihailović was captured by agents of the yugoslav department of national security (odsjek zaštite naroda or ozna). from 10 june to 15 july of the same year, he was tried for high treason and war crimes. on 15 july, he was found guilty and sentenced to death by firing squad.[77]
on 16 july, a clemency appeal was rejected by the presidium of the national assembly. during the early hours of 18 july, mihailović, together with nine other chetnik and nedić's officers, was executed in lisičiji potok. this execution essentially ended the world war ii-era civil war between the communist partisans and the royalist chetniks.

casualties[edit]
yugoslav casualties[edit]
further information: world war ii casualties and world war ii reparations towards yugoslavia

victims by nationality


nationality
1964 list
kočović[78]
žerjavić[17]


serbs
346,740
487,000
530,000


croats
83,257
207,000
192,000


slovenes
42,027
32,000
42,000


montenegrins
16,276
50,000
20,000


macedonians
6,724
7,000
6,000


muslims
32,300
86,000
103,000


other slavs
–
12,000
7,000


albanians
3,241
6,000
18,000


jews
45,000
60,000
57,000


gypsies
–
27,000
18,000


germans
–
26,000
28,000


hungarians
2,680
–
–


slovaks
1,160
–
–


turks
686
–
–


others
–
14,000
6,000


unknown
16,202
–
–


total
597,323
1,014,000
1,027,000


casualties by location according to the 1964 yugoslav list[17]


location
death toll
survived


bosnia and herzegovina
177,045
49,242


croatia
194,749
106,220


macedonia
19,076
32,374


montenegro
16,903
14,136


slovenia
40,791
101,929


serbia (proper)
97,728
123,818


kosovo
7,927
13,960


vojvodina
41,370
65,957


unknown
1,744
2,213


total
597,323
509,849

the yugoslav government estimated the number of casualties to be at 1,704,000 and submitted the figure to the international reparations commission in 1946 without any documentation.[79] the figure included war related deaths but also the expected population if war did not break out, the number of unborn children, and losses from emigration and disease.[80] the same figure was later submitted to the allied reparations committee in 1948 but was claimed to be only from war related deaths.[80] after germany requested verifiable data the yugoslav federal bureau of statistics created a nationwide survey in 1964.[80] the total number of those killed was found to be 597,323.[80] the list stayed a state secret until 1989 when it was published for the first time.[17]
the u.s. bureau of the census published a report in 1954 that concluded that yugoslav war related deaths were 1,067,000. the u.s. bureau of the census noted that the official yugoslav government figure of 1.7 million war dead was overstated because it "was released soon after the war and was estimated without the benefit of a postwar census".[81] a study by vladimir žerjavić estimates total war related deaths at 1,027,000. military losses are estimated at 237,000 yugoslav partisans and 209,000 collaborators, while civilian losses at 581,000, including 57,000 jews. losses of the yugoslav republics were bosnia 316,000; serbia 273,000; croatia 271,000; slovenia 33,000; montenegro 27,000; macedonia 17,000; and killed abroad 80,000.[17] statistician bogoljub kočović calculated that the actual war losses were 1,014,000.[17] the late jozo tomasevich, professor emeritus of economics at san francisco state university, believes that the calculations of kočović and žerjavić "seem to be free of bias, we can accept them as reliable".[82] stjepan mestrovic estimates that about 850,000 people were killed in the war.[18] vego cites figures from 900,000 to a million dead.[83] stephen r. a'barrow estimates that the war caused 446,000 dead soldiers and 514,000 dead civilians, or 960,000 dead in total from the yugoslav population out of 15 million.[16]
the reasons for the high human toll in yugoslavia were as follows:

military operations of five main armies (germans, italians, ustaše, yugoslav partisans and chetniks).[84]
german forces, under express orders from hitler, fought with a special vengeance against the serbs, who were considered untermensch.[84] one of the worst massacres during the german military occupation of serbia was the kragujevac massacre.
deliberate acts of reprisal against target populations were perpetrated by all combatants. all sides practiced the shooting of hostages on a large scale. at the end of the war ustaše collaborators were killed after the bleiburg repatriations.[85]
the systematic extermination of large numbers of people for political, religious or racial reasons. the most numerous victims were serbs killed by the ustaše and croats and muslims killed by the chetniks. the ustaše massacred serbs throughout the independent state of croatia and especially in banija, kordun, lika, northwest bosnia, and eastern herzegovina and killed others in concentration camps such as the jasenovac concentration camp.
chetniks carried out massacres against muslims in bosnia and sandžak and croats in bosnia and herzegovina, northern dalmatia, and lika. jews were partly killed in camps throughout yugoslavia and partly in camps in germany, norway and greece after deportation.[86] in the province of ljubljana, italian authorities led by mario roatta terrorized the slovene civilian population and deported them to concentration camps with the goal of italianizing the area. the large numbers of casualties as a result of the ethnic cleansing the local populace committed on one another, along with the especially brutal methods of execution used-mass hangings, clubbing to death, setting fire to buildings with people inside, etc.,-led even the germans occupying the area to express shock at the violence.[87][88][89] mass killings by partisan purges and at bleiburg were done for both political and ethnic reasons. most victims were either killed for association with fascist forces such as soldiers and collaborators or were civilians of ethnic groups associated with the fascist forces such as hungarian, german and italian.[90]

the reduced food supply caused famine and disease.[91]
allied bombing of german supply lines caused civilian casualties. the hardest hit localities were podgorica, leskovac, zadar and belgrade.[92]
the demographic losses due to a 335,000 reduction in the number of births and emigration of about 660,000 are not included with war casualties.[92]
 germans escorting people from kragujevac and its surrounding area to be executed.
in slovenia, the institute for contemporary history, ljubljana launched a comprehensive research on the exact number of victims of world war ii in slovenia in 1995.[93] after more than a decade of research, the final report was published in 2005, which included a list of names. the number of victims was set at 89,404.[94] the figure also includes the victims of summary killings by the communist regime immediately after the war (around 13,500 people). the results of the research came as a shock for the public, since the actual figures were more than 30% higher than the highest estimates during the yugoslav period.[95] even counting only the number of deaths up to may 1945 (thus excluding the military prisoners killed by the yugoslav army between may and july 1945), the number remains considerably higher than the highest previous estimates (around 75,000 deaths versus a previous estimate of 60,000).
there are several reasons for such a difference. the new comprehensive research also included slovenes killed by the partisan resistance, both in battle (members of collaborationist and anti-communist units), and civilians (around 4,000 between 1941 and 1945). furthermore, the new estimates includes all the slovenians from nazi-occupied slovenia who were drafted in the wehrmacht and died either in battle or in prisoner camps during the war. the figure also includes the slovenes from the julian march who died in the italian army (1940–43), those from prekmurje who died in the hungarian army, and those who fought and died in various allied (mostly british) units. the figure does not include victims from venetian slovenia (except of those who joined the slovenian partisan units), nor does it include the victims among carinthian slovenes (again with the exception of those fighting in the partisan units) and hungarian slovenes. 47% percent of casualties during the war were partisans, 33% were civilians (of which 82% were killed by axis powers or slovene home guard), and 20% were members of the slovene home guard.[96]
in croatia, the commission for the identification of war and post-war victims of the second world war was active from 1991 until the seventh government of the republic, under prime minister ivica račan ended the commission in 2002.[97] in the 2000s, concealed mass grave commissions were established in both slovenia and serbia to document and excavate mass graves from the second world war.

german casualties[edit]
according to german casualty lists quoted by the times for 30 july 1945, from documents found amongst the personal effects of general hermann reinecke, head of the public relations department of the german high command, total german casualties in the balkans amounted to 24,000 killed and 12,000 missing, no figure being mentioned for wounded. a majority of these casualties suffered in the balkans were inflicted in yugoslavia.[98] according to german researcher rüdiger overmans, german losses in the balkans were more than three times higher – 103,693 during the course of the war, and some 11,000 who died as yugoslav prisoners of war.[99]

italian casualties[edit]
the italians incurred 30,531 casualties during their occupation of yugoslavia (9,065 killed, 15,160 wounded, 6,306 missing). the ratio of dead/missing men to wounded men was uncommonly high, as yugoslav partisans would often murder prisoners. their highest losses were in bosnia and herzegovina: 12,394. in croatia the total was 10,472 and in montenegro 4,999. dalmatia was less bellicose: 1,773. the quietest area was slovenia, where the italians incurred 893 casualties.[100] an additional 10,090 italians died post-armistice, either killed during operation achse or after joining yugoslav partisans.

see also[edit]
adriatic campaign of world war ii
allied bombing of yugoslavia in world war ii
museum of 4 july
liberation front of the slovenian people
uprising in serbia (1941)
seven anti-partisan offensives
air warfare on the yugoslav front
yugoslavia and the allies
national liberation war of macedonia
slovene lands in world war ii
beisfjord massacre, a prisoner transfer from yugoslavia that led to norway's largest massacre
russian protective corps, a wehrmacht unit composed of white russian émigrés from serbia
references[edit]


^ mitrovski 1971, p. 211.

^ tomasevich 2001, p. 255.

^ jelić butić 1977, p. 270.

^ colić 1977, pp. 61-79.

^ tomasevich 2001, p. 183.

^ mitrovski, 1971 & 49.

^ tomasevich 2001, p. 167.

^ tomasevich 2001, p. 771.

^ microcopy no. t314, roll 566, frames 778 – 785

^ borković, p. 9.

^ zbornik dokumenata vojnoistorijskog instituta: tom xii – dokumenti jedinica, komandi i ustanova nemačkog rajha – knjiga 3, p.619

^ perica 2004, p. 96.

^ martin k. sorge (1986). the other price of hitler's war: german military and civilian losses resulting from world war ii. greenwood publishing group. pp. 62–63. isbn 978-0-313-25293-8..mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/65/lock-green.svg/9px-lock-green.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d6/lock-gray-alt-2.svg/9px-lock-gray-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/aa/lock-red-alt-2.svg/9px-lock-red-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration{color:#555}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration span{border-bottom:1px dotted;cursor:help}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/wikisource-logo.svg/12px-wikisource-logo.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output code.cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:inherit;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#33aa33;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-right{padding-right:0.2em}

^ geiger 2011, pp. 743-744.

^ geiger 2011, pp. 701.

^ a b a'barrow 2016.

^ a b c d e f žerjavić 1993.

^ a b mestrovic 2013, p. 129.

^ tomasevich 2001, p. 226.

^ ramet 2006, p. 147.

^ tomasevich 2011, p. 308.

^ a b ramet 2006, pp. 145-155.

^ tomasevich 1975, p. 246.

^ tomasevich, jozo (2002). war and revolution in yugoslavia: 1941 - 1945. stanford university press. isbn 9780804779241.

^ trbovich, pp. 131-132.

^ lampe, p. 198.

^ gabriel gorodetsky (8 august 2002). stafford cripps' mission to moscow, 1940-42. cambridge university press. pp. 130–. isbn 978-0-521-52220-5.

^ roberts, p. 26.

^ shaw 1973, p. 92.

^ shaw 1973, p. 89.

^ hungary profile archived 3 february 2007 at the wayback machine, shoah foundation institute visual history archive; usc.edu; accessed 4 december 2015.

^ thomas 1995, p. 24.

^ talmon 1998, p. 294.

^ thomas 1995.

^ lemkin 2008, pp. 241–64.

^ davidson, introduction.

^ tomasevich 2001, p. 85.

^ tomasevich 2001, p. 419.

^ a b thomas 1995, p. 12.

^ tomasevich 2001, p. 420.

^ a b thomas 1995, p. 13.

^ a b c d thomas 1995, p. 17.

^ thomas 1995, p. 10.

^ timofejev 2011.

^ higgins 1966, pp. 11–59, 98–151.

^ a b pavličević 2007, pp. 441–442.

^ bailey, 1980, p. 80

^ lcweb2.loc.gov

^ a b thomas 1995, p. 32.

^ lekovic 1985, p. 83.

^ lekovic 1985, p. 86,87.

^ tomasevich 1975, p. 245.

^ davidson, contact.

^ savic, et al., 2002, p. 60

^ martin, 1946, p.34

^ rendulić, zlatko. avioni domaće konstrukcije posle drugog svetskog rata (domestic aircraft construction after world war ii), lola institute, beograd, 1996, p 10. "at the teheran conference of 28 november to 1 december 1943, novj is recognized as an allied army, this time by all three allied sides, and for the first time by the united states."

^ "while tito fights". time magazine. 17 january 1944. retrieved 14 september 2007.

^ ciglic, et al., 2007, p. 113

^ narodnooslobodilačka vojska jugoslavije. beograd. 1982.

^ stewart, james (2006).  linda mcqueen, ed. slovenia. new holland publishers. p. 15. isbn 978-1-86011-336-9.

^ klemenčič & žagar 2004, pp. 167–168.

^ thomas 1995, p. 33.

^ davidson, rules and reasons.

^ pavlowitch 2008, p. 258.

^ thomas 1995, p. 9.

^ thomas 1995, p. 30.

^ savic & ciglic, 2002, p. 70

^ ciglic, et al., 2007, p. 150

^ pavlowitch 2008, p. 256.

^ thomas 1995, p. 22.

^ a b shaw 1973, p. 101.

^ ambrose, s. (1998). the victors – the men of world war ii. london. p. 335. isbn 978-0-684-85629-2.

^ đilas 1977, p. 440.

^ pavlowitch 2008, p. 259.

^ klemenčič & žagar 2004, pp. 197.

^ john abromeit; york norman; gary marotta; bridget maria chesterton (19 november 2015). transformations of populism in europe and the americas: history and recent tendencies. bloomsbury publishing. pp. 60–. isbn 978-1-4742-2522-9.

^ "too tired", time.com, 24 june 1946.

^ cohen 1996, p. 109.

^ macdonald 2002, p. 161.

^ a b c d cohen 1996, p. 108.

^ u.s. bureau of the census the population of  yugoslavia ed. paul f. meyers and arthur a. campbell , washington d.c.- 1954

^ tomasevich 2001, p. 737.

^ army war college 1994, p. 116.

^ a b tomasevich 2001, p. 744.

^ tomasevich 2001, pp. 744–745.

^ tomasevich 2001, p. 747.

^ james h. burgwyn: "general roatta's war against the partisans in yugoslavia: 1942", journal of modern italian studies, volume 9, number 3, september 2004, pp. 314–329(16), link by ingentaconnect

^ giuseppe piemontese (1946): twenty-nine months of italian occupation of the province of ljubljana. on page 3. book also quoted in: ballinger, p. (2002), p.138

^ pamela ballinger (2003). history in exile: memory and identity at the borders of the balkans. princeton university press. isbn 0-691-08697-4.

^ marcus tanner, croatia: a nation forged in war

^ tomasevich 2001, p. 748.

^ a b tomasevich 2001, p. 749.

^ ds-rs.si archived 19 july 2011 at the wayback machine

^ ds-rs.si archived 19 july 2011 at the wayback machine

^ rtvslo.si

^ delo, sobotna priloga, 30 october 2010.

^ 66 7.6.2002 zakon o prestanku važenja zakona o utvrđivanju ratnih i poratnih žrtava ii. svjetskog rata, narodne-novine.nn.hr

^ davidson, the sixth offensive.

^ overmans 2000, p. 336.

^ the south slav journal. volume 6. 1983. page 117


bibliography[edit]

a'barrow, stephen r. (2016). death of a nation: a new history of germany. book guild publishing. isbn 9781910508817.
bataković, dušan t., ed. (2005). histoire du peuple serbe [history of the serbian people] (in french). lausanne: l’age d’homme.
army war college (1994). parameters: journal of the us army war college. p. 116.
bailey, r. h.  (original edition from 1978). partisans and guerrillas (world war ii; v. 12). chicago, illinois, usa: time-life books. 1980.
borković, milan. kontrarevolucija u srbiji – kvislinška uprava 1941–1944 (in serbo-croatian).
ciglić, b. and savić, d. dornier do 17 the yugoslav story, operational record 1937–1947. jeroplan, belgrade, 2007. isbn 978-86-909727-0-8
cohen, philip j.; riesman, david (1996). serbia's secret war: propaganda and the deceit of history. texas a&m university press. isbn 0-89096-760-1.
colić, mladenko (1977). kolaboracionističke oružane formacije u jugoslaviji 1941–1945. godine: oslobodilačka borba naroda jugoslavije kao opštenarodni rat i socijalistička revolucija (in serbo-croatian). 2.
davidson, basil. partisan picture.
deakin, frederick william (1971). the embattled mountain. oxford: oxford university press.
đilas, milovan (1977). wartime. new york: harcourt brace jovanovich. isbn 0-15-694712-9.
geiger, vladimir (2011). ljudski gubici hrvatske u drugom svjetskom ratu koje su prouzročili "okupatori i njihovi pomagači"; brojidbeni pokazatelji (procjene, izračuni, popisi) (in serbo-croatian).
hehn, paul n. (1979). the german struggle against yugoslav guerrillas in world war ii: german counter-insurgency in yugoslavia, 1941-1943. east european quarterly. isbn 978-0-914710-48-6.
higgins, trumbull (1966). hitler and russia. the macmillan company.
jelić butić, fikreta (1977). ustaše i ndh.
matjaž klemenčič; mitja žagar (2004). "histories of the individual yugoslav nations". the former yugoslavia's diverse peoples: a reference sourcebook. abc-clio. pp. 167–168.
lampe, john r. yugoslavia as history: twice there was a country. p. 198.
lekovic, miso (1985). martovski pregovori 1943.
lemkin, raphael (2008). axis rule in occupied europe: laws of occupation, analysis of government, proposals for redress. introductions by samantha power and william a. schabas (2nd ed.). clarke, new jersey: the lawbook exchange, ltd. pp. 241–264. isbn 1-58477-901-2.
mamula, branko (1985). "the national liberation war in yugoslavia, 1941–1945". the journal of the royal united services institute. 130 (4): 52–56.
maclean, fitzroy (1949). eastern approaches. penguin group.
mccormick, rob (2008). "the united states' response to genocide in the independent state of croatia, 1941–1945". genocide studies and prevention. 3 (1): 75–98.
mestrovic, stjepan (2013). genocide after emotion: the post-emotional balkan war. routledge. isbn 9781136163494.
mitrovski, boro; glišić, venceslav; ristovski, tomo (1971). bugarska vojska u jugoslaviji 1941–1945 [the bulgarian army in yugoslavia 1941–1945] (in slovenian). međunarodna politika.
martin, d. ally betrayed: the uncensored story of tito and mihailovich, prentice hall, new york, 1946.
overmans, rüdiger (2000). deutsche militärische verluste im zweiten weltkrieg. münchen: oldenbourg. isbn 3-486-56531-1.
pavličević, dragutin (2007). povijest hrvatske. naklada pavičić. isbn 978-953-6308-71-2.
pavlowitch, stevan k. (2008). hitler's new disorder: the second world war in yugoslavia. columbia university press. isbn 978-0-231-70050-4.
paris, edmond (1988). convert-- or die!: catholic persecution in yugoslavia during world war ii. chick publications.
perica, vjekoslav (2004). balkan idols: religion and nationalism in yugoslav states. oxford university press. isbn 0-19-517429-1.
ramet, sabrina (2006). the three yugoslavias: state-building and legitimation, 1918–2005. new york: indiana university press. isbn 0-253-34656-8. retrieved 2 june 2011.
roberts, walter r. (1973). tito, mihailović, and the allies, 1941-1945. rutgers university press. isbn 978-0-8135-0740-8.
shaw, l. (1973). trial by slander: a background to the independent state of croatia. canberra: harp books. isbn 0-909432-00-7.
talmon, stefan (1998). recognition of governments in international law: with particular reference to governments in exile. oxford university press. isbn 0-19-826573-5.
timofejev, alexej j (2011). rusija i drugi svetski rat u jugoslaviji [russians and the second world war in yugoslavia] (in serbo-croatian). belgrаde.
trbovich, ana s. (2008). a legal geography of yugoslavia's disintegration. oxford university press. isbn 978-0-19-533343-5.
thomas, nigel; mikulan, krunoslav (1995). axis forces in yugoslavia 1941–45. men-at-arms. 282. illustrated by darko pavlovic. london: osprey. isbn 1-85532-473-3.
thomas, nigel; abbot, peter; chappell, m (2000). partisan warfare 1941–45. london: osprey. isbn 0-85045-513-8.
tomasevich, jozo (1975). the chetniks. stanford university press. isbn 0804708576.
tomasevich, jozo (2001). war and revolution in yugoslavia: 1941–1945. stanford university press. isbn 0804779244.
tošić-malešević, n., 2015. operacije narodnooslobodilačke partizanske i dobrovoljačke vojske jugoslavije i delovanje komunističke partije jugoslavije u 1942. godini /operations of the national liberation partisan and volunteer army of yugoslavia and the actions of the communist party of yugoslavia in 1942. vojno delo, 67(4), pp. 334–358.
vucinich, wayne s.; tomasevich, jozo; mcclellan, woodford; auty, phyllis; macesich, george; zaninovich, m. george; halpern, joel m. (1969).  vucinich, wayne s., ed. contemporary yugoslavia: twenty years of socialist experiment. university of california press. isbn 9780520015364. lccn 69-16512. oclc 47922.
vukcevich, bosko s. (1990). diverse forces in yugoslavia: 1941-1945. authors unlimited. isbn 978-1-55666-053-5.
žerjavić, vladimir. yugoslavia: manipulations with the number of second world war victims. croatian information centre. isbn 0-919817-32-7.

vteworld war ii in yugoslavia1941
invasion of yugoslavia
uprising in bosnia and herzegovina
may 1941 sanski most revolt
june uprising in eastern herzegovina
siege of rogatica
olovo
uprising in serbia
battle of loznica
battle of banja koviljača
operation uzice (first enemy offensive)
operation mihailovic
novi pazar
sjenica
uprising in montenegro
battle of pljevlja
1942
operations southeast croatia and ozren (second enemy offensive)
operation trio (third enemy offensive)
kozara offensive
operation alfa
1943
case white (fourth enemy offensive)
case black (fifth enemy offensive)
siege of turjak
1944
operations kugelblitz and schneesturm (sixth enemy offensive)
operation rösselsprung (seventh enemy offensive)
belgrade offensive
kosovo operation
1945
syrmian front
battle of lijevče field
bar massacre
battle of poljana
battle of odžak
macedonia
world war ii in yugoslav macedonia
slovenia
slovene lands in world war ii 
strategic bombing
belgrade
podgorica
zadar
zagreb

see also

factions in the yugoslav front
people of the yugoslav front

vtehistory of world war ii by region and countryafrica
belgian congo
british somaliland
egypt
french west africa
french somaliland
gold coast
kenya
liberia
nyasaland
madagascar
south africa
southern rhodesia
north africa
tunisia
north america
canada
cuba
el salvador
greenland
mexico
newfoundland
panama
united states
arizona
nevada
new mexico
puerto rico
south america
argentina
brazil
british guiana
colombia
latin america
uruguay
venezuela
asia
burma
ceylon
china
manchuria
dutch east indies
hong kong
india
indochina
iran
iraq
japan
malaya
mongolia
nepal
philippines
sarawak, brunei, labuan, and british north borneo
singapore
thailand
turkey
tuva
europe
albania
austria
belgium
bulgaria
czechoslovakia
denmark
estonia
finland
france
basque country
germany
greece
hungary
iceland
ireland
italy
latvia
liechtenstein
lithuania
luxembourg
netherlands
norway
poland
portugal
romania
slovakia
slovenia
soviet union
azerbaijan
belarus
ukraine
spain
galicia
sweden
switzerland
united kingdom
british empire
channel islands
gibraltar
vatican city
yugoslavia
oceania
australia
nauru
new zealand

vtestates of nazi germanyadministrative divisionsgaue
baden-alsace
bayreuth
berlin
cologne–aachen
düsseldorf
eastern hanover
east prussia
electoral hesse
essen
franconia
halle-merseburg
hamburg
hesse-nassau
lower silesia
magdeburg-anhalt
main franconia
march of brandenburg
mecklenburg
moselland
munich–upper bavaria
nsdap/ao
pomerania
saxony
schleswig-holstein
silesia
swabia
southern hanover–brunswick
thuringia
upper silesia
weser-ems
westphalia-north
westphalia-south
westmark
württemberg-hohenzollern
reichsgaue
carinthia
lower danube
upper danube
danzig–west prussia
flanders
salzburg
styria
sudetenland
tyrol–vorarlberg
vienna
wallonia
wartheland
bezirke
białystok
brussels
operational zones
adriatic littoral
alpine foothills
autonomous regions
bohemia and moravia
general government
galicia
kraków
lublin
radom
warsaw
countries occupied
albania
austria
belgium
channel islands
czechoslovakia
bohemia and moravia
slovakia
denmark
egypt
estonia
france
greece
hungary
italy
latvia
lithuania
luxembourg
monaco
netherlands
norway
poland
san marino
soviet union
belarus
ukraine
tunisia
yugoslavia
croatia
macedonia
montenegro
serbia
military administrations
belgium and northern france
france
greece
luxembourg
serbia
soviet union
poland
reichskommissariatfounded
belgium and northern france
netherlands
norway
ostland
ukraine
planned
caucasus
don–volga
moscow
turkestan
related
areas annexed by nazi germany

vteworld war ii
asia and the pacific
china
south-east asia
north and central pacific
south-west pacific
europe
western
eastern
mediterranean and middle east
north africa
east africa
italy
west africa
atlantic
north america
south america
casualties
military engagements
conferences
commanders
participantsallies.mw-parser-output .nobold{font-weight:normal}(leaders)
australia
belgium
brazil
canada
china
cuba
czechoslovakia
denmark
ethiopia
france
free france (from june 1940)
greece
india
italy (from september 1943)
luxembourg
mexico
netherlands
new zealand
norway
philippines (commonwealth)
poland
south africa
southern rhodesia
soviet union
tuva
united kingdom
united states
puerto rico
yugoslavia
axis andaxis-aligned(leaders)
albania
bulgaria
reorganized national government of the republic of china
independent state of croatia
finland
germany
hungary
free india
iraq
italy (until september 1943)
italian social republic
japan
manchukuo
philippines (second republic)
romania
slovakia
thailand
vichy france
armed neutrality
resistance
albania
austria
belgium
bulgaria
czech lands
denmark
estonia
ethiopia
france
germany
greece
hong kong
italy
japan
jewish
korea
latvia
lithuania
luxembourg
malaya
netherlands
northeast china
norway
philippines
poland
anti-communist
romania
thailand
soviet union
slovakia
western ukraine
vietnam
yugoslavia
monarchists
timelineprelude
africa
asia
europe
1939
poland
phoney war
winter war
atlantic
changsha
china
1940
weserübung
netherlands
belgium
france
armistice of 22 june 1940
britain
north africa
west africa
british somaliland
north china
baltic states
moldova
indochina
greece
compass
1941
east africa
yugoslavia
shanggao
greece
crete
iraq
soviet union (barbarossa)
finland
lithuania
syria and lebanon
kiev
iran
leningrad
gorky
moscow
sevastopol
pearl harbor
the outbreak of the pacific war
hong kong
philippines
changsha
malaya
borneo (1941–42)
1942
burma
changsha
java sea
coral sea
gazala
dutch harbor
 attu (occupation)
kiska
zhejiang-jiangxi
midway
rzhev
blue
stalingrad
singapore
dieppe
el alamein
guadalcanal
torch
1943
tunisia
kursk
smolensk
gorky
solomon islands
 attu
sicily
 cottage
lower dnieper
italy
armistice of cassibile
gilbert and marshall islands
 burma
 northern burma and western yunnan
changde
1944
monte cassino / shingle
narva
korsun–cherkassy
tempest
ichi-go
overlord (battle of normandy - d-day)
neptune
normandy
mariana and palau
bagration
western ukraine
tannenberg line
warsaw
eastern romania
belgrade
paris
dragoon
gothic line
market garden
estonia
crossbow
pointblank
lapland
hungary
leyte
ardennes
bodenplatte
philippines (1944–1945)
burma (1944–45)
1945
vistula–oder
iwo jima
western invasion of germany
okinawa
italy (spring 1945)
borneo
syrmian front
berlin
czechoslovakia
budapest
west hunan
guangxi
surrender of germany
project hula
manchuria
manila
borneo
taipei
atomic bombings
debate
kuril islands
shumshu
surrender of japan
end of world war ii in asia
aspectsgeneralfamines
bengal famine of 1943
chinese famine of 1942–43
greek famine of 1941-1944
dutch famine of 1944–45
vietnamese famine of 1945

air warfare of world war ii
blitzkrieg
comparative military ranks
cryptography
diplomacy
home front
united states
australian
united kingdom
lend-lease
manhattan project
military awards
military equipment
military production
nazi plunder
opposition
technology
allied cooperation
total war
strategic bombing
puppet states
women
art and world war ii
aftermath
expulsion of germans
operation paperclip
operation osoaviakhim
operation keelhaul
occupation of germany
territorial changes of germany
soviet occupations
romania
poland
hungary
baltic states
occupation of japan
first indochina war
indonesian national revolution
cold war
decolonization
treaty on the final settlement with respect to germany
popular culture
war crimes
allied war crimes
soviet war crimes
british war crimes
united states war crimes
german (forced labour) / wehrmacht war crimes
holocaust
aftermath
response
prosecution
italian war crimes
japanese war crimes
unit 731
prosecution
croatian war crimes
against the serbs
against the jews
romanian war crimes
wartimesexual violence
german military brothels
camp brothels
rape during the occupation of japan
sook ching
comfort women
rape of nanking
rape of manila
rape during the occupation of germany
rape during the liberation of france
rape during the soviet occupation of poland
prisoners
finnish prisoners of war in the soviet union
german prisoners of war in the soviet union
german prisoners of war in the united states
italian prisoners of war in the soviet union
japanese prisoners of war in the soviet union
japanese prisoners of war in world war ii
german mistreatment of soviet prisoners of war
polish prisoners of war in the soviet union
romanian prisoners of war in the soviet union
soviet prisoners of war in finland

bibliography
category
portal

vteyugoslavia articleshistory
timeline
creation
kingdom
6 january dictatorship
world war ii
invasion
partisans
chetniks
belgrade offensive
sfr yugoslavia
tito–stalin split
balkan pact
yugoslavism
yugoslavs
in serbia
yugoslav irredentism
yugoslav committee
yugo-nostalgia
breakup
yugoslav wars (1991–1999)
croatian independence
war (1991–1995)
slovenian independence (ten-day war (june–july 1991)
brijuni agreement)
macedonian independence (1991)
bosnian independence (war (1992–1995)
dayton agreement)
serbia and montenegro (1992–2006)
politics
administrative divisions
kingdom
constitution
1921
1931
1946
1953
1963
1974
elections
federal executive council
prime minister
foreign relations (yugoslavia and the nam, yugoslavia and the eec)
governments
heads of state
presidency
members
human rights
lgbt
parliament
titoism
đilasism
rankovićism
political parties
league of communists
presidency
security
counterintelligence
military
history
army (1918–1945
1945–1992
ranks (marshal))
navy (1918–1945
1945–1992)
air force (1918–1945
1945–1992)
territorial defense
economy
agriculture
computer systems (sfry)
dinar (currency)
energy
industry
krone (currency)
mining
national bank
governors
services
stock exchange
telecommunications
internet domain
tourism
transport
society
demographics (sfry)
education (sfry)
healthcare
minorities
postal codes
public holidays
yugoslavs
list
languages
macedonian
serbo-croatian
bosnian
croatian
montenegrin
serbian
slovene (slovenian)
culture
academy
architecture
art
cinema
films
drama
encyclopedia of yugoslavia
folklore
music
composers
national costume
philosophy
religion
sport
football
yugoslav radio television
cuisine
bosnian
croatian
wine
macedonian
wine
montenegrin
wine
serbian
wine
slovenian
wine
literature
bosnian
croatian
macedonian
montenegrin
serbian
slovene
poets
symbols
anthem (1918–1945
1945–1992)
coat of arms
flag of yugoslavia
list
motto
orders, decorations, and medals of sfr yugoslavia

category
portal




 
						retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=world_war_ii_in_yugoslavia&oldid=883952068"					
categories: conflicts in 1941conflicts in 1942conflicts in 1943conflicts in 1944conflicts in 1945wars involving the balkansindependent state of croatiayugoslavia in world war iiworld war ii occupied territoriescommunist revolutionshidden categories: webarchive template wayback linksuse dmy dates from february 2012articles needing additional references from november 2014all articles needing additional referencesarticles needing additional references from december 2015all articles with unsourced statementsarticles with unsourced statements from march 2016articles needing additional references from february 2014wikipedia articles needing clarification from december 2015cs1 french-language sources (fr)cs1 serbo-croatian-language sources (sh)cs1 slovenian-language sources (sl)articles containing german-language text 



navigation menu


personal tools

not logged intalkcontributionscreate accountlog in 



namespaces

articletalk 




variants







views

readeditview history 



more





search



 







navigation


main pagecontentsfeatured contentcurrent eventsrandom articledonate to wikipediawikipedia store 



interaction


helpabout wikipediacommunity portalrecent changescontact page 



tools


what links hererelated changesupload filespecial pagespermanent linkpage informationwikidata itemcite this page 



print/export


create a bookdownload as pdfprintable version 



in other projects


wikimedia commons 



languages


العربيةbosanskicatalàdanskespañolfrançais한국어hrvatskiitalianoქართულიмакедонски日本語norsknorsk nynorskportuguêsromânăрусскийslovenščinaсрпски / srpskisrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиதமிழ்ไทยукраїнськаtiếng việt中文 
edit links 





 this page was last edited on 18 february 2019, at 17:20 (utc).
text is available under the creative commons attribution-sharealike license;
additional terms may apply.  by using this site, you agree to the terms of use and privacy policy. wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the wikimedia foundation, inc., a non-profit organization.


privacy policy
about wikipedia
disclaimers
contact wikipedia
developers
cookie statement
mobile view



 

 



(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgpageparsereport":{"limitreport":{"cputime":"1.780","walltime":"2.074","ppvisitednodes":{"value":9408,"limit":1000000},"ppgeneratednodes":{"value":30572,"limit":1500000},"postexpandincludesize":{"value":483953,"limit":2097152},"templateargumentsize":{"value":40829,"limit":2097152},"expansiondepth":{"value":12,"limit":40},"expensivefunctioncount":{"value":30,"limit":500},"unstrip-depth":{"value":1,"limit":20},"unstrip-size":{"value":142508,"limit":5000000},"entityaccesscount":{"value":2,"limit":400},"timingprofile":["100.00% 1463.237      1 -total"," 28.38%  415.276     11 template:navbox"," 19.68%  288.011      1 template:infobox_military_conflict"," 18.54%  271.290     45 template:cite_book"," 14.31%  209.320     90 template:sfn"," 11.67%  170.819      1 template:reflist"," 11.60%  169.746      1 template:nazi_germany_occupations"," 10.27%  150.318      4 template:lang","  6.42%   93.944      2 template:refimprove","  6.08%   88.901      3 template:ambox"]},"scribunto":{"limitreport-timeusage":{"value":"0.682","limit":"10.000"},"limitreport-memusage":{"value":14606003,"limit":52428800}},"cachereport":{"origin":"mw1347","timestamp":"20190218172027","ttl":2073600,"transientcontent":false}}});mw.config.set({"wgbackendresponsetime":108,"wghostname":"mw1321"});});


