



dodecanese campaign - wikipedia
document.documentelement.classname = document.documentelement.classname.replace( /(^|\s)client-nojs(\s|$)/, "$1client-js$2" );
(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgcanonicalnamespace":"","wgcanonicalspecialpagename":false,"wgnamespacenumber":0,"wgpagename":"dodecanese_campaign","wgtitle":"dodecanese campaign","wgcurrevisionid":883599611,"wgrevisionid":883599611,"wgarticleid":10753304,"wgisarticle":true,"wgisredirect":false,"wgaction":"view","wgusername":null,"wgusergroups":["*"],"wgcategories":["articles needing additional references from october 2018","all articles needing additional references","all articles with unsourced statements","articles with unsourced statements from october 2018","cs1 german-language sources (de)","cs1 italian-language sources (it)","interlanguage link template link number","1943 in greece","mediterranean sea operations of world war ii","battles and operations of world war ii involving greece","battles and operations of world war ii involving italy","battles and operations of world war ii involving poland","campaigns, operations and battles of world war ii involving the united kingdom","conflicts in 1943","dodecanese campaign","military campaigns involving germany","world war ii campaigns of the mediterranean theatre","naval aviation operations and battles"],"wgbreakframes":false,"wgpagecontentlanguage":"en","wgpagecontentmodel":"wikitext","wgseparatortransformtable":["",""],"wgdigittransformtable":["",""],"wgdefaultdateformat":"dmy","wgmonthnames":["","january","february","march","april","may","june","july","august","september","october","november","december"],"wgmonthnamesshort":["","jan","feb","mar","apr","may","jun","jul","aug","sep","oct","nov","dec"],"wgrelevantpagename":"dodecanese_campaign","wgrelevantarticleid":10753304,"wgrequestid":"xgf8nqpaad4aaiegpaaaaaao","wgcspnonce":false,"wgisprobablyeditable":true,"wgrelevantpageisprobablyeditable":true,"wgrestrictionedit":[],"wgrestrictionmove":[],"wgflaggedrevsparams":{"tags":{}},"wgstablerevisionid":null,"wgcategorytreepagecategoryoptions":"{\"mode\":0,\"hideprefix\":20,\"showcount\":true,\"namespaces\":false}","wgwikieditorenabledmodules":[],"wgbetafeaturesfeatures":[],"wgmediavieweronclick":true,"wgmediaviewerenabledbydefault":true,"wgpopupsshouldsendmoduletouser":true,"wgpopupsconflictswithnavpopupgadget":false,"wgvisualeditor":{"pagelanguagecode":"en","pagelanguagedir":"ltr","pagevariantfallbacks":"en","usepageimages":true,"usepagedescriptions":true},"wgmfispagecontentmodeleditable":true,"wgmfenablefontchanger":true,"wgmfdisplaywikibasedescriptions":{"search":true,"nearby":true,"watchlist":true,"tagline":false},"wgrelatedarticles":null,"wgrelatedarticlesusecirrussearch":true,"wgrelatedarticlesonlyusecirrussearch":false,"wgwmeschemaeditattemptstepoversample":false,"wgpoweredbyhhvm":true,"wgulscurrentautonym":"english","wgnoticeproject":"wikipedia","wgcentralnoticecookiestodelete":[],"wgcentralnoticecategoriesusinglegacy":["fundraising","fundraising"],"wgwikibaseitemid":"q708173","wgscorenotelanguages":{"arabic":"العربية","catalan":"català","deutsch":"deutsch","english":"english","espanol":"español","italiano":"italiano","nederlands":"nederlands","norsk":"norsk","portugues":"português","suomi":"suomi","svenska":"svenska","vlaams":"west-vlams"},"wgscoredefaultnotelanguage":"nederlands","wgcentralauthmobiledomain":false,"wgcodemirrorenabled":true,"wgvisualeditortoolbarscrolloffset":0,"wgvisualeditorunsupportededitparams":["undo","undoafter","veswitched"],"wgeditsubmitbuttonlabelpublish":true,"oreswikiid":"enwiki","oresbaseurl":"http://ores.discovery.wmnet:8081/","oresapiversion":3});mw.loader.state({"ext.gadget.charinsert-styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site.styles":"ready","site.styles":"ready","noscript":"ready","user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site":"ready","user":"ready","user.options":"ready","user.tokens":"loading","ext.cite.styles":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.shared":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.commonprint":"ready","mediawiki.toc.styles":"ready","wikibase.client.init":"ready","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.noscript":"ready","ext.uls.interlanguage":"ready","ext.wikimediabadges":"ready","ext.3d.styles":"ready","mediawiki.skinning.interface":"ready","skins.vector.styles":"ready"});mw.loader.implement("user.tokens@0tffind",function($,jquery,require,module){/*@nomin*/mw.user.tokens.set({"edittoken":"+\\","patroltoken":"+\\","watchtoken":"+\\","csrftoken":"+\\"});
});rlpagemodules=["ext.cite.ux-enhancements","site","mediawiki.page.startup","mediawiki.page.ready","mediawiki.toc","mediawiki.searchsuggest","ext.gadget.teahouse","ext.gadget.referencetooltips","ext.gadget.watchlist-notice","ext.gadget.drn-wizard","ext.gadget.charinsert","ext.gadget.reftoolbar","ext.gadget.extra-toolbar-buttons","ext.gadget.switcher","ext.centralauth.centralautologin","mmv.head","mmv.bootstrap.autostart","ext.popups","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.init","ext.visualeditor.targetloader","ext.eventlogging","ext.wikimediaevents","ext.navigationtiming","ext.uls.eventlogger","ext.uls.init","ext.uls.compactlinks","ext.uls.interface","ext.quicksurveys.init","ext.centralnotice.geoip","ext.centralnotice.startup","skins.vector.js"];mw.loader.load(rlpagemodules);});























 





dodecanese campaign 
from wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 jump to navigation
jump to search
this article needs additional citations for verification. please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed.find sources: "dodecanese campaign" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · jstor (october 2018) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
dodecanese campaignpart of the mediterranean and middle east theatre of world war iilocation of the dodecanese islands (in red) in relation to greecedate8 september – 22 november 1943locationdodecanese islands, aegean searesult
german victoryterritorialchanges
german occupation of the dodecanesebelligerents
 italy united kingdom south africa greece poland
 germanycommanders and leaders
 robert tilney (pow) inigo campioni (pow)
 friedrich-wilhelm müllerstrength
55,000 italians[1]  5,300 british[1][2]
7,500 germans[3]casualties and losses
italian:5,350 killed & wounded[2]44,391 captured[1]british:4,800 casualties[2]113 aircraft destroyed1 cruiser crippled3 cruisers damaged6 destroyers sunk4 destroyers damaged3 submarines sunk4 submarines damaged10 minesweepers & coastal defence ships sunk[4][5]
1,184 casualties[2]15 landing craft destroyed
vtemediterranean and middle east theatre
adriatic
north africa
east africa
mediterranean sea
gibraltar
malta
bahrain
balkans
yugoslavia
iraq
syria–lebanon
palestine
iran
sicily
italian mainland
dodecanese
corsica
dragoon
alpes-maritimes

vtedodecanese campaign
rhodes
leros
kos

vtebattle of the mediterranean1940
vado
malta
club run¹
espero ¹²
mers-el-kébir
calabria¹²
cape spada
hurry ¹
cape passero¹
mb8 ¹
taranto
strait of otranto²
white ¹
cape spartivento¹
1941

excess ¹
convoy an 14¹
genoa
abstention
souda bay
matapan
tarigo ²
crete ²
substance ¹
halberd ¹
duisburg ²
bon²
1st sirte¹²
alexandria
1942

2nd sirte¹
calendar ¹
bowery ¹
albumen
harpoon ¹
vigorous ¹
pedestal ¹
agreement
torch
stoneage ¹
toulon
portcullis ¹
skerki²
olterra¹
algiers¹
1943

zuwarah
cigno ²
campobasso ²
sicily
gela
scylla ²
bastia
strait of bonifacio
dodecanese
rhodes
leros
kos
cape bougaroun¹
1944

santorini
symi
port cros
la ciotat
1945

ligurian sea ¹

allied convoys
malta convoys
u-boat campaign
¹ — involved an allied convoy
² — involved an axis convoy

the dodecanese campaign of world war ii was an attempt by allied forces to capture the italian-held dodecanese islands in the aegean sea following the surrender of italy in september 1943, and use them as bases against the german-controlled balkans. operating without air cover, the allied effort failed, with the whole of the dodecanese falling to the germans within two months, and the allies suffering heavy losses in men and ships.[6] the dodecanese campaign, lasting from 8 september to 22 november 1943, resulted in one of the last big german victories in the war.[7]

contents

1 background
2 prelude

2.1 fall of rhodes


3 battle

3.1 battle of kos
3.2 battle of leros
3.3 naval operations


4 aftermath
5 see also
6 references
7 sources
8 external links


background[edit]
further information: military history of greece during world war ii and mediterranean and middle east theatre of world war ii
the dodecanese island group lies in the south-eastern aegean sea, and had been under italian control since the italo-turkish war in 1911. during italian rule, the strategically well-placed islands became a focus of italian colonial ambitions in the eastern mediterranean. rhodes, the largest of the islands, was a major military and aerial base. the island of leros, with its excellent deep-water port of lakki (portolago), was transformed into a heavily fortified aeronautical base, "the corregidor of the mediterranean", as benito mussolini, the italian leader, boasted. an early british attempt to contest italian control of the dodecanese, codenamed operation abstention, was thwarted in february 1941, when italian forces recaptured the island of kastellorizo from british commandos.
after the battle of greece in april 1941 and the allied defeat in the battle of crete in may 1941, greece and its many islands were occupied by the axis powers. with the defeat of axis forces in the north african campaign in spring 1943, winston churchill, the british prime minister, who at least as far back as the gallipoli campaign in world war i had a deep interest in the region, turned his sights on the islands. the british envisaged an operation to capture the dodecanese and crete, to deprive the axis of excellent forward bases in the mediterranean and to apply pressure on neutral turkey to join the war. this would promote a favorite idea of churchill's, that of a "route through the dardanelles to russia as an alternative to the arctic convoys."[8] in the casablanca conference, the go-ahead was given and churchill ordered his commanders to have plans ready for 27 january 1943.[9]
operation accolade called for a direct attack on rhodes and karpathos, with three infantry divisions, an armored brigade, and support units. landings at crete, which was too well fortified and had a strong german garrison, were dropped. the main problem faced by the planners was the difficulty of countering fliegerkorps x of the luftwaffe because of a lack of air cover, as american and british aircraft were based in cyprus and the middle east. this challenge was exacerbated by the demands of the upcoming allied invasion of sicily. the americans were skeptical about the operation, which they regarded as aiming mostly at post-war political benefits for britain and an unnecessary diversion from the italian campaign. they refused to support it, warning the british that they would have to go it alone.[10]
as an italian surrender became increasingly possible, in august 1943 the british started preparations to take advantage of a possible italian-german split, in the form of a smaller version of accolade. a force based on the 8th indian infantry division assembled and american assistance in the form of p-38 lightning long-range fighter squadrons was requested. as a result of the quebec conference and the us refusal to assent to british plans, the forces and ships earmarked for accolade were diverted barely a week before the surrender of italy in the armistice of cassibile on 8 september.[11]

prelude[edit]
fall of rhodes[edit]
main article: battle of rhodes (1943)
 the dodecanese islands
on the announcement of the armistice (surrender), the italian garrisons on most of the dodecanese islands either wanted to change sides and fight with the allies or go home. anticipating italian surrender, german forces, based largely in mainland greece, had been rushed to many of the islands to maintain control. the german forces were part of army group e commanded by luftwaffe general alexander löhr. the most important german force in the dodecanese was the 7,500-strong sturm-division rhodos (assault division rhodes, generalleutnant ulrich kleemann) commanding. this division was formed during the summer on the island of rhodes, which was the administrative center of the dodecanese islands and possessed three military airfields. because of this, rhodes was the principal military objective for both the allies and the germans.
on 8 september 1943, the italian garrison on the island of kastelorizo surrendered to a british detachment, which was reinforced during the following days by ships of the allied navies. the next day, a british delegation, headed by lord jellicoe, was dropped by parachute on rhodes, to persuade the italian commander, admiral inigo campioni, to join the allies. swift action by the german forces forestalled the allies. without waiting for the italians to decide, kleemann attacked the 40,000-strong italian garrison on 9 september and forced it to surrender by 11 september. the loss of rhodes dealt a critical blow to allied hopes.[12] the government of the kingdom of italy surrendered and many italian soldiers in the aegean were tired of the war and had become opposed to mussolini. italian fascist loyalists remained allied to germany in the greek campaign. german forces in greece convinced 10,000 italians in the aegean to continue to support their war effort.
despite this setback, the british high command pressed ahead with the occupation of the other islands, especially the three larger ones of kos, samos, and leros. the germans were known to be overstretched in the aegean, while the allies enjoyed superiority at sea and the air cover provided by 7 squadron, saaf and 74 squadron, raf (supermarine spitfires) at kos was deemed sufficient.[13] it was hoped that from these islands, with italian cooperation, an assault against rhodes could be eventually launched.[14] from 10 to 17 september, the 234th infantry brigade (major-general f. g. r. brittorous) coming from malta, together with 160 men from the special boat service, 130 men from the long range desert group, a company of the 11th battalion, parachute regiment[15] and greek sacred band detachments had secured the islands of kos, kalymnos, samos, leros, symi, castellorizo and astypalaia, supported by ships of the royal navy and royal hellenic navy. the germans quickly mobilized in response. by 19 september, karpathos, kasos and the italian-occupied islands of the sporades and the cyclades were in german hands. on 23 september, the 22nd infantry division (lieutenant-general friedrich-wilhelm müller) garrisoning fortress crete was ordered to take kos and leros.[16]

battle[edit]
battle of kos[edit]
main article: battle of kos
having identified the vital role of the allies' only airfield at kos, fliegerkorps x bombed it and the allied positions of the island, from 18 september. reinforcement aircraft arrived, giving the germans 362 operational aircraft in the aegean by 1 october.[17] the british forces on kos numbered about 1,500 men, 680 of whom where from the 1st durham light infantry, the rest being mainly raf personnel and c. 3,500 italians of the 10th regiment, 50th infantry division regina. on 3 october, the germans effected amphibious and airborne landings known as unternehmen eisbär (operation polar bear) and reached the outskirts of the capital later that day. the british withdrew under cover of night and surrendered the next day. the fall of kos was a major blow to the allies, since it deprived them of vital air cover.[18] the germans captured 1388 british and 3145 italian prisoners.[19] on 3 october, german troops committed a war crime by executing the captured italian commander of the island, colonel felice leggio and nearly 100 of his officers.[citation needed]

battle of leros[edit]
main article: battle of leros
after the fall of kos, the italian garrison of kalymnos surrendered, providing the germans with a valuable base for operations against leros. unternehmen leopard (operation leopard) was originally scheduled for 9 october but on 7 october, the royal navy intercepted and destroyed the german convoy headed for kos. several hundred men and most of the few german heavy landing craft were lost; replacements were transported by rail, and it was not until 5 november that the germans had assembled a fleet of 24 light infantry landing craft. to avoid interception by the allied navies, they were dispersed among several aegean islands and camouflaged. despite allied efforts to locate and sink the invasion fleet, as well as repeated shelling of the ports of german-held islands, the germans suffered few losses and were able to assemble their invasion force, under generalleutnant müller, for unternehmen taifun (operation typhoon) on 12 november.
the german invasion force consisted of personnel from all branches of the wehrmacht, including veterans from the 22nd infantry division, a fallschirmjäger (paratroop) battalion and an amphibious operations company küstenjäger (coast raiders) from the brandenburger special operation units. the allied garrison of leros consisted of most of the 234th infantry brigade with c. 3,000 men of the 2nd the royal irish fusiliers (lieutenant colonel maurice french), the 4th the buffs (the royal east kent regiment), 1st the king's own royal regiment (lancaster) and the 2nd company, 2nd queen's own royal west kent regiment (brigadier robert tilney), who assumed command on 5 november. there were also c. 8,500 regular italian soldiers, mostly naval personnel, under admiral luigi mascherpa.
leros had been subjected by the luftwaffe to a prolonged aerial bombardment, starting on 26 september, which had already caused significant casualties and damage to the defenders of the island and supporting naval forces. in the early hours of 12 november, the invasion force in two groups approached the island from east and west. despite failures in some areas, the germans established a bridgehead, while airborne forces landed on mt. rachi, in the middle of the island. after repulsing allied counter-attacks and being reinforced the following night, the germans quickly cut the island in two and the allies surrendered on 16 november. the germans suffered 520 casualties and captured 3,200 british and 5,350 italian soldiers.[20]

naval operations[edit]
since the operational theater was dominated by a multitude of islands and the allies and germans had to rely on naval vessels for reinforcements and supplies, the naval component of the campaign was especially pronounced. initially, naval presence on both sides was low, most of the allied shipping and warships had been transferred to the central mediterranean in support of the operations in italy, while the germans did not have a large naval force in the aegean. the germans had air superiority, which caused the allies many losses in ships. vice admiral werner lange, german naval commander-in-chief of the aegean, tried to reinforce the isolated german garrisons and carry out operations against allied garrisons, while transporting italian prisoners of war to the mainland. allied ships tried to intercept these ships, resulting in heavy losses. on 23 september, hms eclipse damaged the torpedo boat ta10 and sank the steamer gaetano donizetti, which had 1,576 italian captives on board.[12] another disaster occurred a month later, when usaaf b-25 mitchells and raf beaufighters sank the cargo ship sinfra, which had 2,389 italian pows, 71 greek pows and 204 german guards on board, of whom only 539 were saved.[19]
on 14 september, the first allied loss occurred, when the greek submarine rhn katsonis, was rammed and sunk by u-boat hunter uj 2101. the luftwaffe also intervened on 26 september, when 25 junkers ju 88s sank rhn vasilissa olga and hms intrepid at lakki bay, leros, followed on 1 october by the italian destroyer euro and on 9 october sank hms panther and seriously damaged the cruiser hms carlisle. at the same time, the short range of hunt-class destroyers hms aldenham, rhn pindos and rhn themistoklis prevented them from intercepting the german invasion convoy headed for kos.[19] further losses on both sides followed; after the loss of kos and friendly air cover, the allied navies concentrated on supply missions to the threatened islands of leros and samos, mostly under the cover of night. from 22–24 october, hms hurworth and eclipse sank in a german minefield east of kalymnos, while rhn adrias lost its prow. adrias escaped to the turkish coast and after makeshift repairs, sailed to alexandria.[19]
on the night of 10–11 november, destroyers hms petard, hms rockwood and orp krakowiak bombarded kalymnos and hms faulknor bombarded kos, where german forces were assembling for the attack on leros. the german convoy reached leros on 12 november, escorted by over 25 ships, mostly submarine chasers, torpedo boats and minesweepers. during the subsequent nights, allied destroyers failed to find and destroy the german vessels, limiting themselves to bombarding the german positions on leros. with the fall of leros on 16 november, the allied ships were withdrawn, evacuating the remaining british garrisons.[20] by that time, the germans had also used dornier do 217s of kampfgeschwader 100 (kg 100), with their novel henschel hs 293 radio-controlled missile, scoring two hits. one caused severe damage to hms rockwood on 11 november and another sank hms dulverton two days later.[20] the allies lost six destroyers sunk and two cruisers and two destroyers damaged between 7 september and 28 november 1943.[6]

aftermath[edit]
after the fall of leros, samos and the other smaller islands were evacuated. the germans bombed samos with ju 87 (stukas) of i gruppe, stukageschwader 3 in megara, prompting the 2,500-strong italian garrison to surrender on 22 november. along with the occupation of the smaller islands of patmos, fournoi and ikaria on 18 november, the germans completed their conquest of the dodecanese, which they held until the end of the war. only the island of castellorizo off the turkish coast was held by the british, and was never threatened. the dodecanese campaign was one of the last great defeats of the british army in world war ii, and one of the last german victories, while others have labelled it a hapless fiasco which was badly conceived, planned and executed as a "shoestring strategy".[21] the german victory was predominantly due to their possession of air superiority, which caused great losses to the allies, especially in ships and enabled the germans to supply their forces. the operation was criticized by many at the time as another useless gallipoli-like disaster and laid the blame at churchill's door; perhaps unfairly so, since he had pushed for these efforts to be made far sooner, before the germans were prepared.
the british failure to capture the dodecanese sealed the fate of jews living there. although italy had passed the anti-jewish law of the manifesto of race in 1938, jews living on the dodecanese islands (and italian-occupied greece) experienced much less antisemitism than in the german and bulgarian occupied zones of greece, where harsher and harsher policies were implemented, culminating in march 1943 with deportations to the death camps in occupied poland. the italian surrender, the german takeover and the failure of the allied offensive meant that the haven disappeared. most of the dodecanese jews were murdered by the germans; 1,700 members of the ancient jewish community of rhodes (of a population of about 2,000) were rounded up by the gestapo in july 1944 and only some 160 of them survived the camps.[22][23][24][25] out of 6,000 ladino-speaking jews in the dodecanese, about 1,200 people survived by escaping to the nearby coast of turkey.
italian prisoners of war were transferred to the mainland by the germans in overcrowded unseaworthy vessels, which led to several accidents, of which the sinking of the ss oria on 12 february 1944 was the most deadly. more than 4,000 italians died when the ship sank in a storm; other ships were sunk by british forces.

see also[edit]


world war ii portal
the guns of navarone (1957), novel
the guns of navarone (1961), film
references[edit]


^ a b c levi, aldo. avvenimenti in egeo dopo l´armistizio (pdf). ufficio storico della marina militare. retrieved 2015-08-13..mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/65/lock-green.svg/9px-lock-green.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d6/lock-gray-alt-2.svg/9px-lock-gray-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/aa/lock-red-alt-2.svg/9px-lock-red-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration{color:#555}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration span{border-bottom:1px dotted;cursor:help}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/wikisource-logo.svg/12px-wikisource-logo.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output code.cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:inherit;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#33aa33;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-right{padding-right:0.2em}

^ a b c d tucker, spencer c. (2012). world war ii at sea: an encyclopedia, volume 1 by spencer tucker. isbn 9781598844573. retrieved 2015-08-13.

^ "8 settembre 1943 la resistenza". retrieved 2015-08-13.

^ "warandgamemsw.com". warandgamemsw.com. archived from the original on 2014-01-08. retrieved 2013-10-08.

^ rob forsyth (2011-12-16). "the battle for leros – ted johnson and bill minnear" (pdf). retrieved 2018-11-12.

^ a b cunningham pg 582

^ irving, david (1990). hitler's war. viking press, p.584

^ antony beevor, crete, the battle and the resistance

^ anthony rogers (2007), p. 49.

^ anthony rogers (2007), pp. 51–52.

^ anthony rogers (2007), pp. 54–56.

^ a b "seekrieg 1943, september". wlb-stuttgart.de. retrieved 2013-10-08.

^ "rapidttp resources and information". rapidttp.com. retrieved 2013-10-08.

^ anthony rogers (2007), pp. 66–67.

^ "caithness commandos:special service overseas:part 3 by david bews/steven cashmore:highland archives". iprom.co.uk. retrieved 2013-10-08.

^ anthony rogers (2007), p. 87.

^ anthony rogers (2007), pp. 78–84.

^ "leros churchill's folly". dodecaneso.org. retrieved 2013-10-08.

^ a b c d "seekrieg 1943, oktober". wlb-stuttgart.de. retrieved 2013-10-08.

^ a b c "seekrieg 1943, november". wlb-stuttgart.de. retrieved 2013-10-08.

^ gooderson, ian (4 june 2010). "shoestring strategy: the british campaign in the aegean, 1943". journal of strategic studies. 25 (3): 1–36. doi:10.1080/01402390412331302755.

^ "the jews in greece— introduction". jewishvirtuallibrary.org. retrieved 2013-10-08.

^ "greece virtual jewish tour". jewish virtual library. retrieved 2013-10-08.

^ "holocaust". rhodesjewishmuseum.org. retrieved 2013-10-08.

^ "the holocaust in greece" (pdf). ushmm.org. archived from the original (pdf) on 2013-08-27. retrieved 2013-10-08.


sources[edit]
.mw-parser-output .refbegin{font-size:90%;margin-bottom:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indents>ul{list-style-type:none;margin-left:0}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indents>ul>li,.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indents>dl>dd{margin-left:0;padding-left:3.2em;text-indent:-3.2em;list-style:none}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-100{font-size:100%}
beevor, a. (1991). crete, the battle and the resistance. london: john murray. isbn 978-0-7195-6831-2.
holland, jeffrey (1988). the aegean mission: allied operations in the dodecanese, 1943. santa barbara, ca: greenwood press. isbn 978-0-31326-283-8.
schenk, peter (2000). kampf um die ägäis. die kriegsmarine in den griechischen gewässern 1941–1945 [battle for the aegean sea: the navy in greek waters in 1941–1945] (in german). germany: mittler & sohn. isbn 978-3-81320-699-9.
rogers, anthony (2007). churchill's folly: leros and the aegean: the last great british defeat of world war ii. athens: iolkos. isbn 978-960-426-434-6.
cunningham, a. (1951). a sailor's odyssey: the autobiography of admiral of the fleet viscount cunningham of hyndhope. london: hutchinson. oclc 882476825.
eisenbach, hans peter (2009). fronteinsätze eines stuka-fliegers mittelmeer 1943 [combat operations a stuka pilot in the mediterranean 1943]. aachen: helios-verlag. isbn 978-3-938208-96-0.
insolvibile, isabella (2010). kos 1943–1948: la strage, la storia [kos 1943–1948: the history and the massacre] (in italian). napoli: edizioni scientifiche italiane. isbn 978-8-84952-082-8.
levi, aldo (1957). avvenimenti in egeo dopo l'armistizio (rodi, lero e isole minori) [events in the aegean sea after the armistice (rhodes, leros and smaller islands)]. attività dopo l'armistizio; marina italiana nella seconda guerra mondiale (in italian). xvi. tome 2. roma: ufficio storico della marina militare. oclc 256470111.

external links[edit]
special operations in the dodecanese
account of the battle of leros
time lines of world war ii
vtegreece during world war ii1940–1941 balkans campaigngreco-italian war'"`uniq--templatestyles-0000006a-qinu`"'(1940–1941)battles
pindus
elaia–kalamas
korytsa/korcë
saranda
morava–ivan
himara
klisura pass
trebeshina
italian spring offensive
hill 731
leaders greece
ioannis metaxas
alexandros papagos
charalambos katsimitros
konstantinos davakis
ioannis pitsikas
dimitrios papadopoulos
georgios kosmas
 italy
benito mussolini
galeazzo ciano
sebastiano visconti prasca
ubaldo soddu
ugo cavallero
carlo geloso
german invasion(april–may 1941)battles
metaxas line
vevi
kleisoura pass
thermopylae
crete
leaders greece
king george ii
alexandros papagos
georgios tsolakoglou
 british commonwealth
henry maitland wilson
thomas blamey
bernard freyberg
 germany
wilhelm list
sepp dietrich
kurt student
occupation and collaborationoccupyingpowerspeople & units germany
günther altenburg
hermann neubacher
walter schimana
alexander löhr
hellmuth felmy
friedrich-wilhelm müller
alexander andrae
bruno bräuer
max merten
 italy
angelico carta
pellegrino ghigi
carlo geloso
piero parini
carlo vecchiarelli
11th army
iii army corps
viii army corps
xxvi corps
 bulgaria
andon kalchev
atrocities
kondomari
kandanos
alikianos
doxato
kommeno
kalavryta
lyngiades
distomo
domenikon
drakeia
acqui division
mesovouno
pyrgoi
viannos
vorizia
anogeia
kedros
kleisoura
haidari concentration camp
larissa concentration camp
200 of kaisariani
chortiatis
the holocaust in greece
economicexploitation
greek economy, 1941–1944
great famine
degriges
compulsory loan
collaborationistgovernmentpeople
georgios tsolakoglou
k. logothetopoulos
ioannis rallis
georgios poulos
friedrich schubert
nikolaos bourandas
george s. mercouris
ioannis plytzanopoulos
sotirios gotzamanis
organizations
security battalions
hellenic socialist patriotic organisation (espo)
national union of greece (eee)
greek national socialist party
secessionists
vlach "roman legion"
ohrana
cham collaboration
këshilla
atrocities
paramythia
kokkinia
resistance and free greecenational liberationfront (eam)people
aris velouchiotis
stefanos sarafis
andreas tzimas
georgios siantos
alexandros svolos
ilias tsirimokos
markos vafeiadis
evripidis bakirtzis
organizations
communist party of greece (kke)
socialist party of greece (ske)
union of people's democracy (eld)
greek people's liberation army (elas)
greek people's liberation navy (elan)
political committee of national liberation (peea) and national council
united panhellenic organization of youth (epon)
national solidarity (ea)
organization for the protection of the people's struggle (opla)
slavic-macedonian national liberation front (snof)
operations
drama uprising
reka
mikro chorio
gorgopotamos bridge
meritsa
fardykambos
sarantaporo
porta
1943 athens protest
pinerolo disarmament
steiri
agorelitsa
kournovo tunnel
killing of franz krech
atrocities
feneos executions
5/42 regiment dissolution
meligalas
kilkis
non-eam resistancepeople
napoleon zervas
georgios kartalis
dimitrios psarros
komninos pyromaglou
kostas perrikos
vasileios sachinis
lela karagianni
konstantinos ventiris
manolis paterakis
petrakogiorgis
kimonas zografakis
organizations
national republican greek league (edes)
national bands of greek guerrillas (eoea)
national and social liberation (ekka)
5/42 regiment
defenders of northern greece (yve) / panhellenic liberation organization (pao)
panhellenic union of fighting youths (pean)
prometheus ii
apollo
national organization of crete (εοκ)
hellenic army (es)
northern epirus liberation front (mavi)
others...
operations
espo bombing
gorgopotamos bridge (operation "harling")
agia kyriaki
milia
skala paramythias
xirovouni
trahili
menina
dodona
atrocities
expulsion of cham albanians
british mission in greece (soe)people
eddie myers
chris woodhouse
patrick leigh fermor
bill stanley moss
jerzy iwanow-szajnowicz
operations
operation "albumen"
gorgopotamos bridge (operation "harling")
operation "animals"
asopos bridge (operation "washing")
kidnap of heinrich kreipe
damasta sabotage
greek government-in-exilegreek governmentin exileevents
el alamein
dodecanese
april 1944 mutiny
rimini
people
king george ii
emmanouil tsouderos
sofoklis venizelos
panagiotis kanellopoulos
thrasyvoulos tsakalotos
pafsanias katsotas
greek armed forcesin the middle east
3rd mountain brigade
sacred band
vasilissa olga
adrias
katsonis
papanikolis
13th squadron
335th squadron
336th squadron
liberation and road to the civil warprelude to civil warevents
national bands agreement
plaka agreement [el]
lebanon conference
caserta agreement [el]
operation "manna"
percentages agreement
dekemvriana
treaty of varkiza
people
ronald scobie
georgios papandreou
archbishop damaskinos
georgios grivas
angelos evert
nikos zachariadis

vteworld war ii
asia and the pacific
china
south-east asia
north and central pacific
south-west pacific
europe
western
eastern
mediterranean and middle east
north africa
east africa
italy
west africa
atlantic
north america
south america
casualties
military engagements
conferences
commanders
participantsallies(leaders)
australia
belgium
brazil
canada
china
cuba
czechoslovakia
denmark
ethiopia
france
free france (from june 1940)
greece
india
italy (from september 1943)
luxembourg
mexico
netherlands
new zealand
norway
philippines (commonwealth)
poland
south africa
southern rhodesia
soviet union
tuva
united kingdom
united states
puerto rico
yugoslavia
axis andaxis-aligned(leaders)
albania
bulgaria
reorganized national government of the republic of china
independent state of croatia
finland
germany
hungary
free india
iraq
italy (until september 1943)
italian social republic
japan
manchukuo
philippines (second republic)
romania
slovakia
thailand
vichy france
armed neutrality
resistance
albania
austria
belgium
bulgaria
czech lands
denmark
estonia
ethiopia
france
germany
greece
hong kong
italy
japan
jewish
korea
latvia
lithuania
luxembourg
malaya
netherlands
northeast china
norway
philippines
poland
anti-communist
romania
thailand
soviet union
slovakia
western ukraine
vietnam
yugoslavia
monarchists
timelineprelude
africa
asia
europe
1939
poland
phoney war
winter war
atlantic
changsha
china
1940
weserübung
netherlands
belgium
france
armistice of 22 june 1940
britain
north africa
west africa
british somaliland
north china
baltic states
moldova
indochina
greece
compass
1941
east africa
yugoslavia
shanggao
greece
crete
iraq
soviet union (barbarossa)
finland
lithuania
syria and lebanon
kiev
iran
leningrad
gorky
moscow
sevastopol
pearl harbor
the outbreak of the pacific war
hong kong
philippines
changsha
malaya
borneo (1941–42)
1942
burma
changsha
java sea
coral sea
gazala
dutch harbor
 attu (occupation)
kiska
zhejiang-jiangxi
midway
rzhev
blue
stalingrad
singapore
dieppe
el alamein
guadalcanal
torch
1943
tunisia
kursk
smolensk
gorky
solomon islands
 attu
sicily
 cottage
lower dnieper
italy
armistice of cassibile
gilbert and marshall islands
 burma
 northern burma and western yunnan
changde
1944
monte cassino / shingle
narva
korsun–cherkassy
tempest
ichi-go
overlord (battle of normandy - d-day)
neptune
normandy
mariana and palau
bagration
western ukraine
tannenberg line
warsaw
eastern romania
belgrade
paris
dragoon
gothic line
market garden
estonia
crossbow
pointblank
lapland
hungary
leyte
ardennes
bodenplatte
philippines (1944–1945)
burma (1944–45)
1945
vistula–oder
iwo jima
western invasion of germany
okinawa
italy (spring 1945)
borneo
syrmian front
berlin
czechoslovakia
budapest
west hunan
guangxi
surrender of germany
project hula
manchuria
manila
borneo
taipei
atomic bombings
debate
kuril islands
shumshu
surrender of japan
end of world war ii in asia
aspectsgeneralfamines
bengal famine of 1943
chinese famine of 1942–43
greek famine of 1941-1944
dutch famine of 1944–45
vietnamese famine of 1945

air warfare of world war ii
blitzkrieg
comparative military ranks
cryptography
diplomacy
home front
united states
australian
united kingdom
lend-lease
manhattan project
military awards
military equipment
military production
nazi plunder
opposition
technology
allied cooperation
total war
strategic bombing
puppet states
women
art and world war ii
aftermath
expulsion of germans
operation paperclip
operation osoaviakhim
operation keelhaul
occupation of germany
territorial changes of germany
soviet occupations
romania
poland
hungary
baltic states
occupation of japan
first indochina war
indonesian national revolution
cold war
decolonization
treaty on the final settlement with respect to germany
popular culture
war crimes
allied war crimes
soviet war crimes
british war crimes
united states war crimes
german (forced labour) / wehrmacht war crimes
holocaust
aftermath
response
prosecution
italian war crimes
japanese war crimes
unit 731
prosecution
croatian war crimes
against the serbs
against the jews
romanian war crimes
wartimesexual violence
german military brothels
camp brothels
rape during the occupation of japan
sook ching
comfort women
rape of nanking
rape of manila
rape during the occupation of germany
rape during the liberation of france
rape during the soviet occupation of poland
prisoners
finnish prisoners of war in the soviet union
german prisoners of war in the soviet union
german prisoners of war in the united states
italian prisoners of war in the soviet union
japanese prisoners of war in the soviet union
japanese prisoners of war in world war ii
german mistreatment of soviet prisoners of war
polish prisoners of war in the soviet union
romanian prisoners of war in the soviet union
soviet prisoners of war in finland

bibliography
category
portal




 
						retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=dodecanese_campaign&oldid=883599611"					
categories: 1943 in greecemediterranean sea operations of world war iibattles and operations of world war ii involving greecebattles and operations of world war ii involving italybattles and operations of world war ii involving polandcampaigns, operations and battles of world war ii involving the united kingdomconflicts in 1943dodecanese campaignmilitary campaigns involving germanyworld war ii campaigns of the mediterranean theatrenaval aviation operations and battleshidden categories: articles needing additional references from october 2018all articles needing additional referencesall articles with unsourced statementsarticles with unsourced statements from october 2018cs1 german-language sources (de)cs1 italian-language sources (it)interlanguage link template link number 



navigation menu


personal tools

not logged intalkcontributionscreate accountlog in 



namespaces

articletalk 




variants







views

readeditview history 



more





search



 







navigation


main pagecontentsfeatured contentcurrent eventsrandom articledonate to wikipediawikipedia store 



interaction


helpabout wikipediacommunity portalrecent changescontact page 



tools


what links hererelated changesupload filespecial pagespermanent linkpage informationwikidata itemcite this page 



print/export


create a bookdownload as pdfprintable version 



languages


българскиcatalàdeutschελληνικάfrançais한국어italianoעברית日本語polskiрусскийsuomiதமிழ்українська 
edit links 





 this page was last edited on 16 february 2019, at 12:01 (utc).
text is available under the creative commons attribution-sharealike license;
additional terms may apply.  by using this site, you agree to the terms of use and privacy policy. wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the wikimedia foundation, inc., a non-profit organization.


privacy policy
about wikipedia
disclaimers
contact wikipedia
developers
cookie statement
mobile view



 

 



(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgpageparsereport":{"limitreport":{"cputime":"0.888","walltime":"1.152","ppvisitednodes":{"value":7158,"limit":1000000},"ppgeneratednodes":{"value":0,"limit":1500000},"postexpandincludesize":{"value":413777,"limit":2097152},"templateargumentsize":{"value":11419,"limit":2097152},"expansiondepth":{"value":18,"limit":40},"expensivefunctioncount":{"value":7,"limit":500},"unstrip-depth":{"value":1,"limit":20},"unstrip-size":{"value":67121,"limit":5000000},"entityaccesscount":{"value":2,"limit":400},"timingprofile":["100.00%  843.655      1 -total"," 24.06%  202.962      1 template:reflist"," 23.13%  195.108     17 template:navbox"," 18.92%  159.607     10 template:cite_book"," 14.66%  123.686      1 template:greece_during_world_war_ii"," 14.50%  122.355      1 template:more_citations_needed"," 13.88%  117.118      1 template:navbox_with_collapsible_sections"," 11.75%   99.102      1 template:ambox","  9.06%   76.441      1 template:infobox_military_conflict","  8.71%   73.488     16 template:ship"]},"scribunto":{"limitreport-timeusage":{"value":"0.364","limit":"10.000"},"limitreport-memusage":{"value":8066601,"limit":52428800}},"cachereport":{"origin":"mw1269","timestamp":"20190216120200","ttl":2073600,"transientcontent":false}}});mw.config.set({"wgbackendresponsetime":122,"wghostname":"mw1267"});});


